Title: Charting the cognitive development of children using adult ‘polygenic g scores’

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
Charting the cognitive development of children using adult ‘polygenic g 

scores’ 

Yujing Lin 1, Robert Plomin 1 

> 1

Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, King's College London 

Abstract 

The most highly predictive polygenic scores in the behavioural sciences are 

for cognitive traits, especially general cognitive ability (g) and educational attainment .

We combined polygenic scores derived from genome -wide association studies of 

adult g and educational attainment to create adult 'polygenic g scores' which we 

used to chart the course of cognitive development of 10,000 white British children 

from toddlerh ood through early adulthood. 

We integrated cross -sectional regression, latent growth curve, and 

confirmatory factor analys is to systematically characterise cognitive d evelopment. 

Polygenic g score showed minimal prediction in toddlerhood, modest prediction in 

childhood, and substantial prediction by early adulthood accounting for 12% of the 

variance. Higher polygenic g scores were associated with faster cognitive growth in 

latent g rowth models . Prediction was strongest for a cross -time latent cognitive factor 

(15%) capturing cognitive ability across development. By integrating polygenic 

prediction directly into a structural equation model framework, we provided a 

theoretical upper bound of genetic influences on g under minimal measurement 

error. We also examined the polygenic g score’s prediction of educational 

achievement, behaviour problems , and anthropometric outcomes and found similar 

developmental increases in prediction for educational achievement. 

Together, our findings demonstrate that adult polygenic g scores can be a 

useful tool for charting the development of cognitive traits .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 2

One of the most important outcome s of the DNA revolution for research on 

intelligence and cognitive abilities is the polygenic score (Plomin, 2019) . Genome -

wide association (GWA) studies correlate DNA differences, typically common genetic 

variants called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), with cognitive abilities. 

Many such genetic variants contribute to the substantial heritability of cognitive 

abilities , and the largest effect sizes are minuscule , accounting for less than 0.05% 

of the phenotypic variance (Plomin & von Stumm, 2018; Visscher et al., 2021) . The 

small effect sizes make it difficult to trace pathways from genes to brain to behaviour. 

In contrast, polygenic scores sidestep the need to map these pathways . By

aggregat ing thousands of these small but additive effects , polygenic scores translat e

GWA discoveries directly into a genetic predictor of individual differences among 

unrelated individuals in the population .

Despite the availability of many polygenic scores for cognitive outcomes to 

date, two scores consistently drive the strongest predictions (Procopio et al., 2025) .

The first is a polygenic score for intelligence. One of t he largest GWA analys es of 

adult intelligence (N = ~270,000) produced the IQ , or general cognitive ability (g) ,

polygenic score (g -PGS) , which predicts about 5% of the variance of adult 

intelligence in independent samples (Savage et al., 2018) . GWA analyses require 

large sample sizes to detect the small effects of DNA variants. Conducting a GWA 

study (GWAS) of intelligence requires not only obtaining and genotyping DNA but 

also testing for intelligence, which is difficult with such large samples. For this 

reason, years of schooling (educational attainment) ha s been used as a proxy for 

intelligence (Rietveld et al., 2014) . Educational attainment correlates strongly with 

intelligence , about 0.50 phenotypically (Deary, 2012) and 0.75 genetically (Hill et al., 

2019) . It is assessed with a single self -reported item about the highest level of 

education and, crucially, is routinely collected in most GWA studies as a 

demographic descriptor, making it possible to assemble huge samples for meta -

analysis. The largest GWA analysis of educational attainment had a sample size of 

three million that yielded a polygenic score (EA -PGS ) predicting up to 9% of the 

variance of intelligence , with the strongest prediction observed for verbal ability 

(Okbay et al., 2022) . EA -PGS predicts more of the variance of intelligence than g-

PGS , even though educational attainment is a coarse proxy for intelligence, because 

the EA -PGS sample size is more than ten times greater than the g-PGS sample size. 

Here, we combined g-PGS and EA -PGS to increase the prediction of adult g and 

refer to this composite as an adult ‘polygenic g score’ .

Because inherited DNA differences are fixed at conception, polygenic scores 

remain constant during development, which is unique in developmental research .

Although the genetic architecture of cognitive abilities exhibits some age -dependent 

effects, substantial genetic continuity across the lifespan has been well -documented 

(Hill et al., 2016; Savage et al., 2018) . Since an adult -derived polygenic g score can 

theoretically predict adult g from birth just as well as in adulthood, we can leverage 

this genetic continuity in the opposite direction: us ing the adult polygenic g score as 

a tool to chart the emergence, growth, and changes of cognitive abilities across 

development and to pinpoint the earliest cognitive traits that are captured by adult -

derived genetic predictors . To achieve this, we need longitudinal cognitive data that 

follow children from toddlerhood to adulthood. 

Such l ongitudinal research takes three decades, and as a result, few data 

exist. Meta -analytic evidence indicates that while cognitive abilit y tend s to fluctuate in 

toddlerhood , its stability increases rapidly across childhood, becoming highly stable 

by adolescence (Breit et al., 2024) . Whereas these longitudinal phenotypic 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 3

correlations represent a ceiling for predicting adult g from infant measures, adult 

polygenic g scores can be used as a sharper scalpel for dissecting facets of early 

cognitive development associated genetically with adult g. 

A recent study with an average sample size of about 500 reported that adult -

derived PGS predicted cognitive development with increasing strength across 

development (Gustavson et al., 2025) . The highest prediction reported was for the 

EA -PGS, predicting a peak of 18% of the variance in cognitive ability at age 16, 

which is twice as much as the usual result of 9% for adult samples (Okbay et al., 

2022) . The g-PGS also showed a parallel pattern but with lower predictive strength. 

In addition, longitudinal analyses suggested that the increased prediction is 

attributable to the strengthening influence of stable genetic effects shared across 

ages, rather than the emergence of new, age -specific genetic factors. 

Our study builds on these findings using data from the Twins Early 

Development Study (TEDS; Lockhart et al., 2023) , a population -based cohort with 

over 10,000 British white children . TEDS provides considerably greater statistical 

power in sample size compared to the Gustavson et al. (2025) report. TEDS children 

were assessed using diverse measures of cognitive development in toddlerhood and 

early childhood (2, 3, and 4 years) , middle childhood (7 , 9, and 10 years), 

adolescence (12, 14 , and 16 years), and adulthood ( 25 and 26 years) , providing 

repeated measures of g, verbal ability, and nonverbal ability .

We aim to extend prior cross -sectional and confirmatory factor findings while 

addressing several developmental aspects that were not covered in previous work. 

First, we create a polygenic g score as a composite predictor by combining EA -PGS 

and g-PGS (Maier et al., 2018) . Second, we include latent growth curve modelling to 

chart developmental trajectories as predicted by the polygenic g score. Third, we 

examine the tails of the polygenic distribution to investigate if cognitive development 

diverges for the highest and lowest scorers. Finally, educational achievement ,

behaviour problems , and anthropometric outcomes were also assessed 

longitudinally, enabling a comprehensive examination of polygenic g score prediction 

across trait domains. 

In our preregistration (https://osf.io/vhuyj/overview ), we specified five 

hypotheses: 1) the polygenic g score significantly predicts most cognitive outcomes, 

with educational achievement yielding the strongest correlation, 2) prediction for 

cognitive abilities increases from toddlerhood to early adulthood; 3) the polygenic g 

score also predict s behaviour problems and anthropometric outcomes; 4) prediction 

is linear across the distribution, indicating that high and low extremes are 

quantitatively, not qualitatively, different from the rest of the distribution; and 5) there 

are no significant sex differences in polygenic g prediction. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 4

Methods 

Sample 

We leveraged data from the Twins Early Development Study (TEDS), a 

longitudinal cohort of 13,759 families with twins born between 1994 and 1996 in 

England and Wales (Lockhart et al., 2023) . Phenotypic data were collected across 

multiple waves, including assessments at approximately ages 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 

14, 16, 18, 21, 25, and 26 years. Genotypic data were available for 10,346 

participants. Ethical approval for TEDS was obtained fr om King’s College London 

Research Ethics Committee (References: PNM/09/10 –104 and HR/DP -20/2122060), 

and informed consent was obtained prior to each wave of data collection. 

For cross -sectional analyses, all participants with available DNA data and at 

least one phenotypic measure were included. To calculate a total score for a given 

measure, participants were required to have completed at least half of the scale. For 

measures composed of multiple subscales, the same rule applied to each subscale, 

and a participant was included only if at least half of the subscales were available. 

For longitudinal analyses, we included participants with data available for at 

least two ages (N = ~4500 to ~8000) .

Measures 

Phenotypic Measures 

The present study focuses on outcomes selected for their consistent 

assessment across the ages. From ages 2 to 26, we assessed cognitive abilities ,

educational achievement , behaviour problems, and anthropometric measures using 

age -appropriate measures. Additional measures specific to one age or one 

developmental stage are provided in the supplementary text . Complete 

documentation of all measures across ages is available in the TEDS data dictionary 

(https://datadictionary.teds.ac.uk/home.htm ). 

Early Cognitive Abilities (Ages 2 -4). Phenotypic measures at early ages 

were collected via booklets sent to families. At ages 2 and 3, booklets were sent only 

to families of twins born in 1994 and 1995, as twins born in 1996 were not age -

appropriate for the tests. At age 4, booklets were sent to all families. 

Verbal ability at ages 2 to 4 included vocabulary (what children can say) and 

grammar (how children use words). Vocabulary was assessed via parent -reported 

checklists. At age 2, parents completed a 100 -word checklist adapted from the 

MacArthur Communicative Development Index (MCDI; Fenson et al., 1993, 2000) . At 

age 3, the checklist included 45 MCDI words and 55 new words from a literature 

review and pilot testing , along with two additional questions about whether the child 

was talking and combining words. At age 4, 48 words selected from the literature 

review and pilot testing were used. Grammar was also measured using questions 

derived from the MCDI. At ages 2 and 3, parents completed the 6 -item word use and 

12 -item sentence complexity scales. At age 3, the word use scale was expanded to 

12 i tems. At age 4, a single 6 -point global rating scale assessed language 

complexity from ‘not yet talking ’ to ‘talking in long and complicated sentences. ’ The 

verbal ability composite for the MCDI was calculated as the standardised mean of 

vocabulary and grammar scores. More detailed descriptions of the TEDS verbal 

measures between ages 2 to 4 are available in the TEDS data dictionary and 

previous TEDS publications (Dionne et al., 2003; Hayiou -Thomas et al., 2012) .

Nonverbal ability was assessed using the Parent Report of Children's Abilities 

(PARCA; Saudino et al., 1998) , including parent -administered tasks and parent -

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 5

report questionnaires. At age 2, parent -administered tasks included matching (8 

items), brick building (4 items), folding (1 item), and copying (7 items) from the 

Bayley Scales of Infant Development (Bayley, 1993) and a design drawing task (4 

items) adapted from the McCarthy Scales (McCarthy, 1972) . The parent -report 

component assessed conceptual knowledge (26 items). At age 3, parent -

administered tasks included odd -one -out (16 items), design drawing (6 items), and 

matching (16 items), with conceptual knowledge assessed via 24 items. At age 4, 

paren t-administered tasks comprised the age 3 odd -one -out and design drawing 

tasks , plus draw -a-man (1 item) and puzzles (12 items). Conceptual knowledge was 

assessed via 12 items. The nonverbal ability composite was calculated as the 

standardised mean of parent -administered and parent -report PARCA scores ,

following the TEDS data dictionary and established practice in previous TEDS 

publications (Asbury et al., 2005; Oliver et al., 2004; Petrill et al., 2001; Saudino et 

al., 1998) .

General cognitive ability at each age was calculated as the standardised 

mean of verbal and nonverbal composites. 

Cognitive Abilities at Later Ages (Ages 7 -25). Cognitive ability measures at 

ages 7, 9, 10, 12, 16, and 25 have been described in detail in a previous TEDS 

publication and are only briefly summarised here (see Lin et al., 2025 supplementary 

materials ). The o nly age not included in Lin et al. (2025) was age 14, though the 

measures are similar to other ages .

At age 7, cognitive assessments were conducted via telephone interviews. 

Verbal ability was measured using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children 

(WISC -III) Similarity and Vocabulary tests (Wechsler, 1992) . Nonverbal ability was 

assessed using the Conceptual Grouping Test and WISC Picture Completion Test 

(McCarthy, 1972) .

At ages 9 and 10, verbal ability was assessed using WISC -III as a Process 

Instrument (WISC -III -PI) Vocabulary and General Knowledge tests (Kaplan et al., 

1999) . Nonverbal ability was measured using the Cognitive Abilities Test 3 (CAT3) 

figure classification and figure analogy tests at age 9 and WISC -III -UK Picture 

Completion and Raven's tests at age 10 (Raven et al., 1996; Smith et al., 2001) .

Assessments were administered via mailed booklets at age 9 and online at age 10 

and all subsequent ages. 

At age 12, verbal ability comprised language tests (syntax, semantics, 

pragmatics) and reading tests (comprehension and fluency) (GOAL, 2002 ; Hammill 

et al., 1994; Markwardt, 1997; Torgesen et al., 1999; Wiig et al., 1989; Woodcock et 

al., 2001) . Nonverbal ability was assessed using mathematical ability tests from the 

National Foundation for Education Research (Smith et al., 2001) . General cognitive 

ability was independently assessed using WISC -III -PI Vocabulary , General 

Knowledge, Picture Completion (Wechsler, 1992) , and Raven’s Pattern test (Raven 

et al., 1996) .

At age 14, verbal ability was assessed using a 27 -item WISC -III -PI vocabulary 

multiple -choice test (Kaplan et al., 1999) . Nonverbal ability was measured using the 

30 -item Raven's Standard Progressive Matrices (Raven et al., 1996) .

At age 16, verbal and nonverbal abilities were assessed using the Mill Hill 

Vocabulary test (Raven et al., 1998) and Raven's Standard and Advanced 

Progressive Matrices (Raven et al., 1996) .

Between ages 7 and 16, except for age 12, verbal and nonverbal composites 

were calculated as standardised means of their respective component tests, and 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 6

general cognitive ability was calculated as the standardised mean of the verbal and 

nonverbal composites. 

At a ge 18 , assessment only included two spatial ability online measures 

developed by TEDS researchers (Malanchini et al., 2020; Rimfeld et al., 2017) : a 

bricks test and a navigation study. The Bricks test measured spatial ability through 

mental rotation and visualisation using both 2D and 3D stimuli across six subtests (9 

items each): 2D rotation, 2D rotation and visualisation, 2D visualisation, 3D rot ation, 

3D rotation and visualisation, and 3D visualisation. Both individual subtest scores 

and the overall Bricks total score (mean of all six subtests) were included in the 

present study. The Navigation test included 30 tasks across six types (5 items eac h): 

orientation -direction, orientation -landmarks, map reading without memory, map 

reading with memory, perspective, and scanning. Each task generated accuracy, 

speed, and total scores; only the overall total score (mean of the six task types ) was 

used in analyses. 

At age 25, cognitive abilities were assessed using Pathfinder, a gamified web -

based measure developed by TEDS researchers (Malanchini et al., 2021) . Verbal 

ability (20 items) included the Mill Hill vocabulary, missing letter, and verbal 

reasoning tests. Nonverbal ability (20 items) included Raven’s standard progressive 

matrices and three visual puzzle tests on analogies, grouping, and logical 

sequenc es. Unlike earlier ages, cognitive ability scores at age 25 were not 

standardised; general cognitive ability scores ranged from 0 to 40, while verbal and 

nonverbal scores each ranged from 0 to 20. 

Educational Achievement . Educational outcomes were examined using 

educational achievement from primary school to university. Educational outcomes at 

ages 7, 9, 10, 12, 16, 18, 21, and 26 have been described previously (Lin et al., 

2025) . The present study extended these general outcomes by including subject -

specific grades up to age 18 and adding assessment at age 14. 

At ages 7, 9, 10, and 12, teachers rated achievement in English and 

mathematics (starting at age 7) and science (starting at age 9) based on the National 

Curriculum Levels ( https://www.gov.uk/national -curriculum/overview ). The ratings 

ranged from 0 -4 at age 7 and 0 -9 at later ages. 

At age 14, parents reported grades in English, mathematics, and science and 

the grades were translated to the 0 -9 National Curriculum Levels. 

At age 16, the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) is a 

national -level exam taken at the end of compulsory education. GCSE exam grades 

were obtained for core subjects (English, mathematics, and science), humanities, 

and languages. The grades ranged from 4 (G) to 11 (A*). 

At age 18, A -level and AS -level qualifications were assessed across English, 

mathematics, science, technology, humanities, languages, and vocational subjects. 

A-levels are two -year qualifications completed after compulsory education and 

required for univer sity entry. AS -levels represent completion of the first year only. 

When A -level grades were unavailable, AS -level grades were used. Grades ranged 

from 1 (E) to 6 (A*). 

At age 21, university degree classification was self -reported on a scale from 1 

(lowest pass) to 5 (first -class honours). 

At age 26, most twins had completed their education. Therefore, educational 

attainment (i.e., years of schooling) was used to measure educational outcomes. For 

twins missing age 26 data, age 21 educational attainment was used (correlation 

between two ages: r = 0.86). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 7

Behaviour Problems . Behaviou r problems were primarily assessed using the 

Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) (Goodman, 1997) , which was 

administered consistently across ages from 2 to 26 and across multiple informants. 

The SDQ yields five subscales: conduct problems, emotional problems, 

hyperactivity, peer problems, and prosocial behaviour. The first four problem 

subscales were summed to create a total problems score at each age. 

Between ages 2 to 4, the Preschool Behaviour Questionnaire (Behar scales) 

was used to measure parent -reported behaviour problems (Behar, 1977) , with items 

converted to SDQ -comparable components by TEDS researchers 

(https://datadictionary.teds.ac.uk/pdfs/4yr/234yr_behaviour_items.pdf ). From age 7 

onward, the standard 25 -item SDQ was administered with multiple informants: 

parent reports at ages 7, 9, 12, 16, and 21 (emotional and peer problem subscales 

were not available from parents at age 16); teacher reports at ages 7, 9, and 12; an d

self -reports at ages 12, 16, 21, and 26. 

We also included measures of anxiety and ADHD symptoms collected at 

multiple ages. Additional behaviour problems assessed at one or two ages were 

examined as outcomes; these results are presented in the Supplement ary Materials .

Socioeconomic Status (SES). Family SES was assessed at birth and at 

ages 7, 16, and 21. Each SES composite was standardised as z -scores and 

calculated from parental employment status (coded according to the UK Standard 

Occupational Classification or SOC, 

https://www.ons.gov.uk/methodology/classificationsandstandards/standardoccupatio 

nalclassificationsoc/ ), parental highest educational qualifications, and household 

income. 

Genetic Measures 

Genotyping for the TEDS participants was conducted on one of two platforms: 

the Affymetrix Genome -Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 and the Illumina 

HumanOmniExpressExome -8v1.2. DNA was obtained from either buccal cheek 

swabs or saliva samples collected over several waves. 

Following quality control, genotypes from both platforms were separately 

phased using EAGLE2 and then imputed to the Haplotype Reference Consortium 

(release 1.1) (Durbin, 2014; Loh et al., 2016; McCarthy, 2016) . After imputation, 

harmonisation, and merging of the two datasets, a final set of 7,363,646 SNPs for 

10,346 twins remained for analysis. More details of the genotyping and imputation 

processes are described in previous TEDS publications (Lin et al., 2025; Selzam et 

al., 2018) .

We constructed polygenic scores using LDpred2 -auto, a Bayesian method 

that adjusts GWAS summary statistics for linkage disequilibrium (LD) using the 

HapMap3+ reference panel (Privé et al., 2021) . Approximately 1.1 million SNPs 

common between the TEDS sample and the HapMap3+ panel were included. The 

most recent GWAS summary statistics of educational attainment ( N = 765,283 ) and 

intelligence ( N = 266,453 ) were used (Okbay et al., 2022; Savage et al., 2018) .

Although the educational attainment GWAS includes approximately three million 

individuals, the publicly available summary statistics exclude the 23andMe cohort 

due to data -sharing restrictions. Additionally, we acknowledge the availability of 

alternative GWAS for cognitive abilities (e.g., Davies et al., 2018; de la Fuente et al., 

2021; Lam et al., 2021; Williams et al., 2023) . These datasets represent partially 

overlapping cohorts and employ varying methodologies for constructing the latent g 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 8

factor. We used the Savage summary statistics because they remain one of the most 

widely used and validated benchmarks for cognitive abilities. 

To maximise the prediction of general cognitive ability, we combined the EA -

PGS and g-PGS polygenic scores using SMTPred (Maier et al., 2018) . SMTPred 

calculates optimal multi -trait weights by scaling each input polygenic score to its 

expected variance using GWA S summary statistics ( i.e., SNP heritability, genetic 

correlation, and sample size). Because our input scores were derived using a Best 

Linear Unbiased Prediction (BLUP) approach , which accounts for linkage 

disequilibrium structure and prevents overestimating highly correlated variants ,

SMTPred utilise s the same BLUP weighting to further increase prediction accuracy. 

In our sample, EA -PGS was weighted 0. 91 and g-PGS 0. 31 . The resulting 

combined score, termed the polygenic g score , correlated with g-PGS at 0. 62 and 

with EA -PGS at 0. 97 (Figure 1) . While the correlation with EA -PGS is high, the 

composite was derived empirically , providing the strongest prediction of cognitive 

abilities that could be achieved using two polygenic scores on SMTPred. This 

polygenic g score was used as the primary predictor for all cognitive abilities ,

educational achievement , educational attainment, behaviour problems , and 

anthropometric outcomes in the present study. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 9

Figure 1. Correlatio ns between polygenic g score, g -PGS, EA -PGS, and 

general cognitive ability (g) across ages. 

Statistical Analyses 

The present study was pre -registered at  https://osf.io/vhuyj/overview .

Analyses were performed using RStudio 2023.09.1+494 with codes available on 

GitHub (https://github.com/YujingLinn/Cog -PGS ).

Before carrying out the main analyses, we conducted sensitivity tests to 

examine potential effects of age, sex, zygosity, twin birth order, genotyping chip, and 

the first ten genomic principal components (PCs) on all phenotypes and family 

socioeconomic sta tus measured across development. Sensitivity analyses of the 

polygenic g score were also conducted, except for age effects. Results are detailed 

in Supplementary Table S1.

Sensitivity analyses revealed significant associations between several 

covariates and the phenotypes. Specifically, age, sex, zygosity, genotyping chip, and 

the first ten genomic PCs showed significant effects on about half of the phenotypes. 

Twin birth order showed no significant effects. For the polygenic g score, significant 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 10 

effects were detected for zygosity and the ninth and tenth PCs. We adopted a 

conservative approach by including age, sex, genotyping chip, and the first ten 

genomic PCs as covariates in all cross -sectional analyses for consistency, even 

though not all phenotypes were significantly associated with every covariate. Age 

was excluded as a covariate in longitudinal analyses. 

The apparent zygosity effect in the TEDS can arise from maternal 

characteristics associated with dizygotic twinning. DZ twinning is related to maternal 

fertility and increases with maternal age due to a higher probability of double 

ovulation (Hubers et al., 2024) . Consequently, mothers of DZ twins tend to be older 

on average than mothers of MZ twins. Because maternal age is associated with 

SES , DZ twins in our sample had slightly higher SES at birth than MZ twins. After 

adjusting for SES at birth, the zygosity effect disappeared (variance explained =

~0.2%). A minor contribution also arose from the genotyping design: the initial 

Affymetrix phase primarily included unrelated twins, whereas the later Illumina phase 

preferentially recruited DZ co -twins. Therefore, w e performed additional analyses 

stratifying the sample into monozygotic and dizygotic twins to examine whether the 

polygenic g score predictions were robust across zygosity groups. 

Polygenic Score Prediction 

Our main analysis examine d associations between our polygenic g score and 

outcomes at each age using a subsample of unrelated individuals (one randomly 

selected twin per pair). All phenotypes were analysed, including both composite 

scores and their constituent components or specific test scores. 

All continuous outcomes were standardised prior to analysis. Models included 

age, sex, genotyping chip, and the first ten PCs as covariates to control for batch 

effects and population structure. We report standardised beta coefficients for the 

polygenic g predictor. Incremental variance explained was calculated as the 

difference in R² between the full model and a reduced model containing only 

covariates. Confidence intervals were estimated using percentile bootstrapping with 

1000 iterations. 

To ensure the robustness of our findings, we repeated all prediction analyses 

separately among females, males, monozygotic twins, and dizygotic twins. 

Confirmatory Factor Analyses 

Next , we examined the polygenic g score prediction of a cross -time 

confirmatory factor of the phenotypes. We extracted cross -time latent factors from 

repeated measures of the same construct, assuming these reflect stable underlying 

latent traits. Using multilevel structural equation modelling (SEM) to account for twin 

structure (i.e., family clustering), we conducted confirmatory factor analyses (CFA) 

for g, verbal ability, nonverbal ability, educational achievement, SDQ, anxiety, and 

ADHD. Whereas cross -sectional analyses used one randomly selected twin per 

family to ensure independence, SEM analyses included both twins from each pair to 

increase statistical power , retaining the full sample while appropriately adjusting for 

within -family non -independence. 

We used three approaches to extract latent factors for total scales and 

subscales : a single cross -time latent factor across all ages, a higher -order latent 

factor derived from developmental stages, and a higher -order latent factor derived 

from shared measurement methods. 

For cognitive and educational outcomes, informants and measurement 

methods varied by developmental stage . Early c ognitive measures were parent -

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 11 

administered , while later tests were self -administered . Similarly, e ducational 

achievement was primarily teacher -evaluated , while national exam scores were 

parent -reported . Because different informants were used at different ages (e.g., 

parent -administered tests in early childhood, self -administered tests in adolescence), 

the confirmatory factors for cognitive abilities and educational achievement reflect 

developmental changes over time as well as potential method variance associated 

with different informants . To account for the resulting method variance and 

developmental changes, cognitive abilities were modelled by both developmental 

stage and assessment method. Developmenta lly, first -order latent factors were 

extracted for early childhood (ages 2, 3, and 4), middle childhood (ages 7, 9, and 

10), and adolescence (ages 12, 14, and 16). Because age 25 constituted a single 

time point, no separate latent factor was estimated; ins tead, it was integrated directly 

alongside the first -order factors to establish a second -order latent factor. This 

developmental structure was replicated for verbal and nonverbal abilities. 

Methodologically, cognitive measures were grouped into early measures 

(ages 2, 3, and 4), middle measures (ages 7, 9, 10, 12, and 14), and later measures 

(ages 16 and 25). This method structure was identical for verbal abilities and 

nonverbal abilities, wi th one exception for nonverbal tests: age 7 was modelled 

independently due to its unique use of the WISC, while ages 9 through 25 were 

grouped together based on their consistent use of the Raven's matrices .

For educational achievement, we constructed a cross -time latent factor 

aggregating the teacher -rated primary school grades. 

For behaviour outcomes, multiple informants were used at some age s. For 

example, SDQ was reported by parents at ages 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 12, 16, and 21; by 

teachers at ages 7, 9, and 12; and by self -report at ages 12, 16, 21, and 26. This 

multi -informant approach reflects developmental appropriateness: parent reports are 

most suitable in early childhood when children cannot report reliably, teacher reports 

provide complementary school -based pers pectives during school age, and self -

reports become increasingly val id as adolescents develop greater self -awareness 

and autonomy. We therefore extracted both cross -rater latent factors (combining all 

informants) and within -rater latent factors when three or more assessments from the 

same informant were available for a given construct. Since the same assessment 

scales were used across ages for behaviour outcomes, we only constructed higher -

order latent factors stratified by developmental stages. 

We then used the polygenic g score to predict these latent factors and 

compared predictive validity against the age -specific cross -sectional predictions in 

the whole sample and the sex -stratified sample . To approximate real -world predictive 

utility, we extracted the latent factor scores for each individual and treated them as 

the dependent variables in our prediction models. Additionally, to establish the 

theoretical upper bound of the genetic effect s, we incorporated the polygenic g score 

directly into our SEM as a predictor, generating an error -free prediction at the latent 

level. All m odels included age, sex, genotyping chip, and the first 10 genomic 

principal components as covariates, with standardised beta coefficients and 

incremental R² reported. 

Latent Growth Curve Model 

We conducted latent growth curve analyses to examine how the polygenic g 

score predicts both baseline levels (intercept) and developmental trajectories (slope) 

across time. The analyses were conducted for measures with repeated assessments 

across development, including general cognitive ability, verbal and nonverbal 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 12 

abilities, educational outcomes, the subscales of the SDQ, anxiety, ADHD, height, 

and BMI. Because all phenotypic measures were standardi sed (mean = 0, SD = 1) 

within each age group prior to analysis, our models capture changes in a 

participant's relative ranking compared to their peers . Therefore, a positive 

association with the intercept indicates that higher polygenic g scores predict a

higher initial relative ranking in the cohort , while a positive association with the slope 

indicates that higher polygenic g scores predict an upward shift in peer ranking over 

time. To account for varying deve lopmental intervals between assessment waves, 

we use d the exact age differences (in years) from baseline rather than treating the 

interval s between each assessment equally. 

For measures with multiple potential informants, we prioritised consistency 

across developmental stages. For most phenotypes, we used parent reports before 

age 18 and self -reports from age 18 onwards. When parent reports were unavailable 

in childhood or ad olescence, we prioritised teacher reports, followed by child reports; 

however, in most cases , child reports were used when parent reports were 

unavailable. 

Missing data in the repeated measures were handled using Full Information 

Maximum Likelihood within the latent growth curve models (Enders & Bandalos, 

2001) . This approach uses all available data points for each participant, allowing 

inclusion of individuals with partially missing timepoints. Participants were included if 

they had data available for at least two timepoints. No additional imputation was 

perfor med for other variables included in the models. 

Consistent with the confirmatory factor analyses, all latent growth models 

used the full twin sample with multilevel model ling to account for family clustering, 

maximising statistical power. Sex was included as a covariate in models for the 

whole sample. We also conducted multi -group analyses to compare intercepts and 

slopes between females and males, with family clustering accounted for within each 

sex -stratified sample. 

Profile Analys is of Extremely High and Extremely Low Polygenic g Scores 

We examined the developmental trajectories of participants with extreme 

polygenic g scores, defined as scores above or below three standard deviations from 

the population mean. 

To maximise sample size, we leveraged the full sample and assigned 

polygenic g scores to the MZ co -twins of genotyped individuals, as only one twin per 

MZ pair was genotyped because MZ twins share identical genomes. This gave us 19 

participants with scores three standard deviations above the mean and 12 

participants with scores three standard deviations below the mean. 

We described the observed values of cognitive, educational, and behaviour 

problem outcomes for these extreme groups across development (standardised for 

comparability). 

To robustly compare differences in outcomes across development between 

high and low score groups, we divided the full sample into deciles based on 

polygenic g scores and conducted independent samples t -tests comparing the top 

and bottom deciles at each age. 

Nonlinearity Tests 

Finally, to test whether the relationship between polygenic g scores and 

outcomes is linear, we conducted regression analyses including a quadratic term for 

the polygenic g score. A significant quadratic term would indicate nonlinearity, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 13 

representing either accelerating or decelerating effects at the extremes of the 

distribution. Conversely, a non -significant quadratic term would support linearity, 

suggesting that high and low extremes differ only quantitatively, not qualitatively, 

from th e rest of the distribution. 

Multiple Testing Correction 

We applied the false discovery rate (FDR) correction to account for multiple 

testing across all regression analyses. All reported p -values are FDR -adjusted 

values. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 14 

Results 

We focus primarily on cognitive, educational, and behaviour problem 

phenotypes in th is section, with other phenotypes discussed as relevant. Full results 

for all phenotypes, including anxiety, ADHD, anthropometric outcomes, and those 

assessed at just one or two ages, are reported in the Supplement ary Materials .

A correlation matrix for all variables is presented in Supplementary Table S 2,

with domain -specific illustrations in Supplementary Figure S1. Descriptive statistics 

for all phenotypes and the polygenic g score are reported in Supplementary Table 

S3.

2a)

2b)

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 15 

2c)

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 16 

Figure 2. Polygenic g score prediction of cognitive abilit ies , educational 

achievement, and behaviour problems across development. 

Standardised beta ( β) coefficients with 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals 

(1000 iterations) for the prediction of developmental outcomes by polygenic g 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 17 

score. Panel a : General cognitive ability (g) composite, and domain -specific 

verbal and nonverbal ability composites measured from ages 2 to 25. To 

account for variations in development and assessment, higher -order latent 

factors stratified by developmental stages and measurement methods, as well 

as cross -time common factors , were included. Panel b : Educational 

achievement in English, mathematics, and science, and a core -subject 

composite. Science was first measured at age 9, while English and 

mathematics w ere also assessed at age 7. The core -subject composite was 

derived from English, mathematics, and science (where available) from ages 

7 to 18, with general university grades used at age 21 and years of schooling 

at age 26. For plotting purposes, 'core subj ect' serves as an overarching 

category representing educational achievement and attainment through age 

26. A cross -time latent factor aggregating primary school grades was also 

included. Panel c : Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) five 

subscales (conduct problems, emotion problems, hyperactivity, peer 

problems, and prosocial behaviour) and total problems score measured from 

ages 2 to 26. Cross -time latent factors and higher -order latent factors by 

developmental stages were also included. For SDQ, the rater is indicated by a 

symbol shape (parent, teacher, or child). For other outcomes, performance -

based measures were used, with parent or teacher ratings at early ages and 

self -reports or test -based assessments at later ages. The vertical dashed line 

at β = 0 represents no association. Asterisks denote FDR -adjusted statistical 

significance: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, **** p < 0.0001. Complete 

numerical results, including sex -stratified and zygosity -stratified analyses, are 

reported in Supplementary Table S4.

Polygenic g Score Prediction from Toddlerhood to Early Adulthood 

Polygenic g score significantly predicted most outcomes across phenotypes at 

most ages from childhood onwards. As shown in Figure 2a, f or cognitive abilities , the 

prediction was weak or absent in toddlerhood (ages 2 to 4). From childhood, the 

prediction increased steadily and reached a peak in early adulthood (age 25) with 

standardised beta coefficients of 0.3 6 (95% CI [0. 32, 0. 40 ]) for both g and verbal 

ability, and 0.28 [0.24, 0. 32] for nonverbal ability. 

Similar patterns were identified for the individual verbal and nonverbal tests :

weak or absent prediction in early childhood that strengthened with age (see 

Supplementary Figure s S2 and S3) . Among verbal tests, the strongest prediction 

emerged for the Verbal Analogies from the age 25 Pathfinder battery ( β = 0. 33 [0. 29,

0. 37]). Among nonverbal tests, the strongest prediction was for the age 16 

Understanding Number task ( β = 0.31 [0.27, 0.35]). 

For educational outcomes (Figure 2b), polygenic g score associations were 

moderate at age 7 ( β = 0.25) and increased through mid -adolescence. Prediction 

strength peaked at age 16 for GCSE grades: English ( β = 0. 38 [0. 36, 0. 41 ]), 

mathematics ( β = 0. 39 [0. 37, 0.42]), science ( β = 0. 39 [0. 36, 0.42]), and the core -

subject composite ( β = 0. 42 [0. 40 , 0.4 5]). Polygenic g score associations declined for 

A-level, university grades and years of schooling. 

For behaviour problems, w e focused on SDQ measures (Figure 2c). Negative 

associations were observed for most behaviour problem measures across ages and 

raters. Significant predictions emerged in toddlerhood for all SDQ subscales and 

peaked at a variance explained of 2% in late childhood and adolescence, then 

slightly weakened in early adulthood. For prosocial behaviour, the polygenic g score 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 18 

explained negligible variance (all <0.5%) after accounting for age and sex effects ,

despite slightly negative associations .

For other behaviour problems (anxiety in Supplementary Figure S4; ADHD in 

Supplementary Figure S5), weak negative associations were observed from early 

childhood onward . Interesting patterns emerged for height and BMI, with non -

significant associations until early adulthood, then positive associations with height 

and negative associations with BMI ( Supplementary Figure S6). For other 

miscellaneous outcomes, associations were largely positive for education - and 

cognitive -related phenotypes and showed mixed patterns for wellbeing -related 

phenotypes ( Supplementary Figure S7 ). 

As a sensitivity test, a full comparison confirm ed that polygenic g score 

prediction s outperform both the EA -only and g -only PGS predictions across 

phenotypes (Supplementary Table S4 ).

Polygenic g Score Prediction of Cross -Time and Cross -Rater Latent Factor 

We extracted cross -time latent factors to examine polygenic g score 

prediction across development and measuremen ts . For behaviour outcomes, we 

additionally constructed both cross -rater and within -rater latent factors. All observed 

variables loaded significantly onto their respective latent constructs ( Supplementary 

Table S5), with standardised loadings ranging from 0. 15 to 0. 95 . Model fit indices are 

provided in Supplementary Table S6.

For models based on a single cross -time factor (and for cross -rater models of 

behaviour problems), overall model fit was modest, reflecting heterogeneity across 

development al stages and measurement s. However, when latent factors were first 

extracted within developmental stage or measurement and then combined into a 

higher -order latent factor, model fit improved substantially and was generally good 

(Supplementary Table S 6). These hierarchical models better capture the 

developmental and methodological structu re of the data while still isolating the 

shared variance representing the underlying trait. 

To evaluate predictive validity, we first extracted individual -level factor scores 

and used them as outcomes in regression models predict ed by polygenic g score s.

In addition, to estimate the theoretical upper bound of prediction, we incorporated the 

polygenic g score directly into the SEM as a predictor of the latent factors. This 

approach estimates prediction at the latent level without measurement error in the 

outcome. 

For cognitive abilities, polygenic prediction differed across latent modelling 

approaches. For general cognitive ability, prediction was strongest for the 

developmental -stage higher -order factor ( β = 0.32), followed by the measurement -

specific higher -order factor ( β = 0.30) and the cross -time factor ( β = 0.27). A similar 

pattern was observed for the latent factors representing verbal and nonverbal 

abilities. However, these latent -factor predictions did not exceed the strongest 

prediction observed at any ind ividual age . One explanation is that cognitive 

measures in late adolescence or adulthood more closely capture the mature 

cognitive trait and may include age -specific genetic influences that are not shared 

with earlier developmental measures. In contrast, cross -time lat ent factors retain only 

the variance common across ages, which can attenuate prediction if the polygenic 

score also captures age -specific variance. 

When the polygenic g score was incorporated directly into the SEM, the 

pattern of prediction across modelling approaches was similar, but effect estimates 

were stronger (Supplementary Table S7) . Prediction was strongest for a cross -time 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 19 

latent cognitive factor capturing cognitive ability accounting for developmental stages 

within the SEM (β = 0.39). By integrating polygenic prediction directly into the SEM 

framework, this approach provides a theoretical upper bound of genetic influences 

on g under minimal measurement error. 

For educational outcomes, the primary school stage latent -factor predictions 

were similar to and did not substantially exceed those obtained for individual 

measures. When the prediction was estimated directly within the SEM, the strongest 

effect was observed for the core -subject latent factor ( β = 0.38), compared to β = 

0.32 using extracted factor scores. 

For behaviour problems , the cross -time cross -rater factor and the 

developmental -stage higher -order cross -rater factor showed similar prediction s for 

SDQ total problems ( β = 0.18), representing the strongest estimates across 

behaviour models and exceeding those observed at individual ages . When the 

prediction was estimated directly within the SEM, the corresponding effect increased 

to β = 0.20. 

Within -rater models generally showed better model fit, with the 

developmental -stage higher -order within -rater models providing the best overall fit. 

However, cross -rater predictive estimates were higher , though not significantly 

higher , than the corresponding within -rater models. One possible explanation is that 

different informants capture partially distinct aspects of behaviour problems. 

Combining information across raters may therefore capture a broader representation 

of the underlying behaviour construct, which could be more s trongly aligned with the 

stable liability indexed by the polygenic g score. 

Standardised path diagrams for all 73 models appear in Supplementary 

Figure s S8 and S9 .

Polygenic g Score Prediction of Developmental Trajectories 

Beyond examining associations at individual ages and cross -time common 

factors, we used latent growth curve models to examine how the polygenic g score 

predicts both baseline levels (intercepts) and rates of change (slopes). Only 

longitudinal measures were included for cognitive abilities , educational ach ie vement, 

behaviour problem s, and anthropometric outcomes. The full results are presented in 

Supplementary Table S8 for the full sample and in Table S9 for the sex -stratified 

sample. 

Overall, the latent growth curve models demonstrated acceptable fit to the 

data across phenotypes (average Comparative Fit Index [CFI] = 0.88; full fit indices 

for all models are detailed in Supplementary Table s S8 and S 9). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 20 

3a) 

3b)

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 21 

Figure 3. Predicted (3 a) and empirically observed (3 b) latent growth 

trajectories for general cognitive ability from ages 2 to 25. Trajectories 

are presented for individuals with high (+1 SD), average (Mean), and low ( –1

SD) polygenic g scores. The predicted model was derived directly using the 

unstandardi sed estimates from the latent growth curve. The observed model 

represents the descriptive average scores at each developmental wave for 

the three groups. All observed scores were standardi sed within each age 

wave prior to plotti ng to reflect rank -order changes. Visuali sations of the 

predicted and observed models for all longitudinal outcomes are available in 

Supplementary Figures S 10 and S1 1, respectively. Corresponding sex -

stratified models are provided in Supplementary Figures S1 2 and S1 3.

PGgS = polygenic g score 

At the baseline , the polygenic g score already displayed significant positive 

associations with cognitive, educational, and anthropometric outcomes (Figure 3 a for 

g and Figure S1 0 for all phenotypes ). The strongest baseline prediction was for core -

subject achievement ( βstandardised = 0.3 1), followed by English, maths, and science 

achievement (β = 0.26 to 0.27 ). The baseline predictions for cognitive abilities were 

between 0.06 and 0.07. In contrast, all behaviour problem intercepts showed 

negative associations ranging from -0.02 to -0.1 3, indicating that children with higher 

polygenic g scores generally exhibited higher initial cognitive and educational 

performance and fewer behaviour problems .

Across development , the polygenic g score predicted steeper relative 

increases for most cognitive (β = 0. 02) and educational outcomes (β = 0. 01) .

Together, the positive baseline and growth effects for cognitive and 

educational outcomes implied that children with higher polygenic g scores started 

with higher cognitive and educational performance and continued to gain a relative 

advantage at a steady rate across development. 

For behaviour problem s, while the baseline effects were mostly significant, the 

slope effects we re not , suggesting that children with higher polygenic g scores begin 

with fewer behaviour problems but show slightly faster relative increases over time, 

gradually moving closer to the average developmental trajectories. 

In contrast, we found the opposite for BMI, which yielded a combination of a

positive intercept (0.0 5) and a negative slope ( -0.1 2), indicating that children with 

higher polygenic g score s started with a higher BMI in relation to their peers, while 

gradually mov ing down to a BMI lower than their peers across development .

To complement the modelled estimates, observed trajectories are provided 

(Figure 3b for g and Figure S 11 for all phenotypes ). The empirical trajectories align 

with the predicted trajectories, particularly for cognitive and educational outcomes. 

The notable exception was height; the observed data revealed substantial 

developmental fluctuations , which correspond to the poor fit of the latent growth 

model for height. 

Polygenic g Score Prediction Across the Distribution 

To examine whether polygenic g score prediction varies across the 

distribution, we first tested for nonlinear effects by including both linear and quadratic 

terms in the same model. Across all outcomes, no significant quadratic effects were 

observed in eit her the full sample or sex -stratified analyses (all incremental R² < 

0.01, all FDR -adjusted p > 0.05; Supplementary Table S10 ). These results indicate 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 22 

that associations are linear throughout the distribution, with no evidence of stronger 

or weaker effects at the ends of the polygenic score distribution. 

Second, we compared phenotypic outcomes between individuals at the 

distributional tails —those in the top versus bottom polygenic g score deciles 

(Supplementary Table S11 ). For cognitive abilitie s, individuals at the top of the 

distribution consistently scored significantly higher than those at the bottom from age 

7 onwards, with occasional exceptions (e.g., spatial ability in adolescence and 

adulthood). Differences were non -significant in toddlerhood . For educational 

achievement , all comparisons between dis tributional extremes were statistically 

significant. For behaviour problem s, approximately half of the phenotypes showed 

non -significant differences between the top and bottom deciles. For example, peer 

problems across most ages and raters, as well as height and BMI, showed no 

significant differences between top and bottom decil es. The magnitude of decile 

differences generally corresponded to population -level prediction strength. 

Outcomes with stronger overall associations (such as cross -age and cross -rater 

composite scores) consistently showed significant differences between the top and 

the bottom polygenic g score deciles. 

Polygenic g Score Prediction for the Highest and Lowest Individuals 

To examine outcomes at the distributional extremes in greater detail, we 

identified individuals with the highest (N = 19) and lowest (N = 1 2) polygenic g 

scores (Figure 4). Sample characteristics are presented in Supplementary Table S3

and group comparisons (t -test s) in Supplementary Table S1 2. Due to small sample 

sizes, most comparisons were not statistically significant. Notably, SES differed 

significantly between groups at all ages. 

For cognitive abilities , both groups initially performed within one standard 

deviation (SD) of the population mean in toddlerhood and early childhood (Figure 

4a). By middle childhood, t he high polygenic score group had IQ -equivalent scores 

of about 110 . The low polygenic score group had IQ -equivalent scores between 80 

and 90 in middle childhood but experienced substantial attrition; by adulthood, only 

one individual remained in the study. 

Educational achievement yielded similar developmental trends. The high 

polygenic score group performed about one SD above the population mean, while 

the low polygenic score group performed about one SD below the mean (Figure 4b). 

For behaviour problem s, neither group differed significantly from the population 

mean or from each other (Figure 4c). Mean trajectory comparisons for the additional 

phenotypic groups are presented in Supplementary Figure S14.

4a) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 23 

4b) 

4c) 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 24 

Figure 4. Mean developmental trajectories for individuals with the 

high est and low est polygenic g scores. Mean trajectories across 

development for individuals with polygenic g scores >145 and <55. Panel a:

General cognitive ability (g) composite and domain -specific composites 

(nonverbal and verbal ability). Panel b: educational achievement outcomes 

including English, mathematics, science, and core -subject composite (sum of 

English, mathematics, and science). Panel c: Strengths and Difficulties 

Questionnaire (SDQ) five subscales and total problem score. All measures 

are standardised to mean = 0, SD = 1, except for cognitive ability measures 

(mean = 100, SD = 15). Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals; 

absence of confidence intervals indicates that only one individual was 

measured at that age. For phenotypes with multiple raters, one rater per age 

is used: parent ratings before age 18 and child/self -ratings at age 18 and 

older. The b lack horizontal line at y = 0 represents the population average. 

PGgS = polygenic g score 

Polygenic g Score Prediction Among Subsamples 

Polygenic g score predictions showed high consistency across sex es at each 

age, across ages, across development al trajectories , across distribution s, and 

among the extreme scorers . Estimates were typically within one to two standard 

errors of each other , well within the range of overlapping 95% confidence intervals .

Cognitive composites and individual cognitive tests showed nearly identical 

predictions for males and females. Educational outcomes showed similar patterns for 

both sexes, with predictions increasing through high school and declining thereafter. 

For beha viour problem s, predictions were also comparable between sexes, wi th only 

occasional deviations. For example, the polygenic g score predicted life satisfaction 

at age 16 more strongly for females ( β = 0.19) than for males (0.05) . On average, the 

differences in standardised beta coefficients between sexes were smaller than 0.01. 

Developmental trajectories were also largely similar between sexes, 

particularly for cognitive and educational outcomes. Occasional differences emerged 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 25 

for behaviour measures. For instance, for the ARBQ shyness subscale, females 

showed relatively stable differences across polygenic score groups across ages, 

whereas for males , these group differences gradually attenuated over time, with all 

groups converging toward the cohort average. 

Zygosity comparisons likewise revealed minimal differences. Predictions were 

highly similar for monozygotic and dizygotic twins, with an average difference in 

standardised beta coefficients of only 0.01 across all phenotypes. The largest 

observed differenc e was for A-level technology grades at age 16 (0. 02 for 

monozygotic twins vs 0. 16 for dizygotic twins), though such differences were rare 

exceptions. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 26 

Discussion 

Polygenic scores derived from adult intelligence and educational attainment 

continue to be the strongest predictors of cognitive development. By combining g-

PGS and EA -PGS , we created an adult polygenic g score to chart cognitive 

development from toddlerhood (age 2) to early adulthood (age 26). Our polygenic g 

score improved prediction from 9% variance explained using EA -PGS alone to 12% 

for g at age 2 5. Prediction was even higher when estimated using an error -free 

structural equation model with cross -time latent factors, reaching 15% for g. 

Additionally, for educational achievement, the polygenic g score predicted up to 18%

of variance at age 16, and up to 3% for behaviour problems and anthropometric 

outcomes. 

The p olygenic g score predicts cognitive outcomes as early as age 2

(β standardised = 0. 03 to 0. 05). Although the prediction was largely negligible in 

toddlerhood and early childhood , it increased steadily from childhood to early 

adulthood, peaking at βstandardised = 0. 36 at age 25 , supporting our first two 

hypotheses on the significant and increased polygenic score prediction with age for 

cognitive abilitie s. These age -related increases in PGS prediction are consistent with 

both twin and genomic studies. For example, twin heritability estimated in TEDS 

increased from 41% at age 9 to 66% at age 17 (Haworth et al., 2010) . Another study 

extend ed the finding and show ed that cognitive heritability remains stable from 

young adulthood into late midlife (Lyons et al., 2017) . A similar pattern was identified 

in genomic studies using PGS (Allegrini et al., 2019; Gustavson et al., 2025) . This 

pattern is known as the Wilson effect, which refers to the increasing heritability of IQ 

with age (Bouchard, 2013) .

Several mechanisms help explain this phenomenon. First, discovery GWA 

studies of cognitive abilities are conducted in adults; thus, the SNP effect estimates 

in these GWA studies more closely match the genetic architecture of cognitive 

outcomes in later dev elopmental stages than in toddlerhood or early childhood. 

Second, phenotypic measures are less stable and reliably assessed at younger 

ages, which limits how well the polygenic g score can predict cognitive abilities in 

early childhood , as the phenotypic correlation represent s the upper bound of genetic 

prediction . For example, the phenotypic correlation of intelligence between ages 2 

and 25 was modest (r = 0.11), but increased substantially by late adolescence, 

reaching r = 0.65 between ages 16 and 25. Nevertheless, substantial genetic 

continuity across the lifespan supports our approach of using an adult -derived 

polygenic g score to chart cognitive development , as noted in the Introduction . In 

addition, a genome -wide association study on general cognitive function r eported a 

genetic correlation of 0.71 between childhood and older ages (Hill et al., 2016) and 

Savage et al. (2018) also found high genetic correlations (> 0.62) across child hood ,

young adul thood , and adul thood . Third, while developmental changes in genetic 

architecture play a role , increasing active and evocative gene –environment 

correlation continues contributing to the magnification of genetic effects over time, as 

individuals increasingly select, evoke, and create environments that align with their 

genetic propensities (Plomin, 1994) .

Despite potential constrain ts in early -age measurement, the polygenic g score 

is still one of the best predictors of cognitive development. By combining g-PGS and 

EA -PGS , we introduced additional genetic signals relevant to cognitive abilities 

(Plomin & von Stumm, 2018) . We achieve d even higher predictive power within an 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 27 

error -free SEM framework of g, verbal ability, and nonverbal ability with 15%, 16%, 

and 13% variance explained , respectively. 

However, in practice, extracting cross -time latent factor scores did not 

outperform the strongest predictions from later -age observed phenotypes. Although 

one might expect the cross -time factor to perform best by stripping away age -specific 

noise, this was not the case here. As our participants age, their genetic architecture 

increasingly aligns with the adult cohorts used in the original GWAS , which likely 

contributes more to the increase in prediction accuracy at later ages than the 

removal of age -specifi c noise by cross -time latent factors .

The increasing alignment between participants' genetic architecture and the 

adult GWAS reference also helps contextualise the challenge of measurement 

invariance. Because cognitive assessments inevitably change as children grow, 

methodological variance and developmental progression are inextricably linked. 

However, the steady rise in predictive power as participants approach adulthood 

strongly suggests that genuine developmental shifts may be the primary driver, 

rather than a mere measurement artefact of us ing different tests. 

In addition, our latent growth curve models captured both baseline differences 

and developmental change s. Children with higher polygenic g scores showed higher 

baseline cognitive performance and a modest but statistically significant increase in 

relative growth rate , consistent with increasing gene -environment correlation over 

time. These findings illustrate that the influence of polygenic g score is not limited to 

predicting outcomes at isolated ages but also characterises the overall 

developmental trajectory of cognitive abilities from early childhood to adulthood. 

We next examined educational achievement , behaviour problems , and 

anthropometric measures . Polygenic g score predicted most trait domains, 

support ing the third hypothesis . The strongest prediction was for educational 

achievement , consistent with previous research (Wilding et al., 2024) . Prediction of 

educational achievement increased until the end of secondary school, peaking at 

18% for GCSE grades, and then declined for subsequent educational milestones, 

reaching approximately 7% for years of schooling (educational attainment) at age 26. 

Similar developmental patterns were reported in independent research (Kvalvik et 

al., 2025) . While a polygenic g score captures the variance in standardi sed, fine -

grained cognitive batteries and school test scores, educational milestones are 

increasingly influenced by non -cognitive abilities and environmental variance 

(Malanchini et al., 2024) , which explain s the attenuated predictive power of polygenic 

g score after age 16 .

Moreover, a s with cognitive traits, higher polygenic g scores are associated 

with higher baseline educational achievement and steeper relative gain . In contrast, 

predictions for behaviour problems and anthropometric outcomes were negligible to 

weak and showed less consistency. Behaviour problems showed negative baseline 

associations and small positive slope estimates, indicating that children with higher 

polygenic g scores began with fewer behaviour problems relative to their peers, but 

exhibited a slight upward shift in relative ranking over time. This pattern might reflect 

regression to the cohort mean and artefacts from standardisation across varying 

instruments, rather than substantive developmental change. No consistent sex 

differences were observed. 

In line with our fourth hypothesis, p rediction across the distribution of 

polygenic g scores was linear. The absence of significant quadratic effects indicates 

that individuals at the end of the distribution differ quantitatively rather than 

qualitatively from the rest of the sample. At the distributional extremes of the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 28 

polygenic g scores (+/ –three standard deviations), individuals who we re three 

standard deviations above the mean showed, on average, around one to two 

standard deviations advantage in cognitive and educational outcomes in adulthood. 

Behaviour problems and anthropometric outcomes showed almost no meaningful 

differences between extremes. 

Finally, consistent with our fifth hypothesis, we found no evidence for sex 

differences in the predicti on of the polygenic g score across outcomes. 

Our study has several limitations. First, we applied European -derived GWAS 

weights to a British white cohort. While this shared genetic background reduced 

confounding and made our estimates robust, it limits the generali sability of our 

findings to other populations with differing allele frequencies and environmental 

contexts .

Second , the weaker prediction for nonverbal relative to verbal ability reflects 

the composition of our polygenic g score. By incorporating EA -PGS, our composite 

captures a substantial amount of education -specific genetic variance, which is more 

strongly associated with language and reading skills than with mathematical or 

spatial outcomes (Procopio et al., 2025) . Although the UK Biobank verbal numerical 

reasoning test contains slightly more nonverbal/numerical items, these questions are 

predominantly text -based word problems (e.g., applied arithmetic and age 

comparisons). The tasks categorised as numerical reasoning rely heavily on reading 

comprehension (Genç et al., 2021) . Both components of our composite therefore 

share a verbal bias. We nevertheless term the composite the ‘polygenic g score’ 

because its weights were derived empirically to maximise prediction of g, and 

because educational attainment is highly genetically correlated with g, suggesting 

that much of the predictive power of EA -PGS reflects shared genetic influences on 

cognitive abilities. Moreover, we acknowledge that the EA -PGS also derive s

predictive power from noncognitive skills (Demange et al., 2021) , and caution that 

our composite should be interpreted as a genetic predictor of adult g rather than a 

genetically specific measure of g .

Third , our g composite was constructed by averaging verbal and nonverbal 

abilities. Although this composite performed well, hierarchical phenotypic models 

would allow us to estimate g more precisely from the underlying tests and could 

improve prediction. Fourth , discovery GWA studies rely on common variants. Recent 

evidence suggests that rare genetic variants contribute substantially to cognitive 

differences and could improve prediction with whole -genome sequencing 

(Wainschtein et al., 2025) .

Fifth , caution is needed when applying polygenic g scores for genetic 

explanation beyon d prediction (Plomin & von Stumm, 2022) . Recent debates about 

environmental confounding in polygenic prediction reflect the distinction between 

causal explanation and prediction. Whereas causal models aim to isolate biological 

mechanisms, our predictive framework intentionally captures all correlated pa thways 

to maximise explained variance. Accordingly, our beta estimates represent an upper 

bound of predictive accuracy rather than so -called ‘direct genetic effects ’ (Lin et al., 

2025) .

As twin analyses suggest increase d heritability of intelligence and cognitive 

abilities from childhood to young adulthood, molecular genetic studies have made 

use of this finding by focusing on the genetics of adults. While twin designs rely on 

phenotypic measurements at each developmental stage to estimate heritability, 

GWA S-based and PGS -based approaches can quantify genetic propensities from 

conception onward. After decades of research, we are now able to leverage adult 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 29 

molecular genetic findings in the reverse direction to chart child cognitive 

development as it is genetically associated with adult cognitive abilities . Our results 

show that prediction begins as early as age 2, increases steadily through 

development, and is especially powerful in predicting growth trajectories. Importantly, 

this predictive utility does not depend on a causal explanation of individual SNP 

effects, but rather on the aggregation of genetic signals associated with the 

phenotype (Lin et al., 2025; Plomin & von Stumm, 2022) .

Together, we show that combining two highly predictive polygenic scores 

yields substantial insights into cognitive developmental trajectories from toddlerhood 

and early childhood to early adulthood. Alongside other early -life predictors ,

polygenic score s fixed at conception continue to be one of the strongest predictors 

available for long -term cognitive development. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 30 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge the ongoing contribution of the participants in the 

Twins Early Development Study (TEDS) and their families. TEDS is supported by the 

UK Medical Research Council (MR/V012878/1 and previously MR/M021475/1) . Y .L.

is supported by a KCL -CSC joint scholarship awarded by King’s College London and 

the China Scholarship Council. 

For the purposes of open access, the author has applied a Creative 

Commons Attribution (CC BY) license to any Accepted Author Manuscript version 

arising from this submission. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 31 

References 

Allegrini, A. G., Selzam, S., Rimfeld, K., von Stumm, S., Pingault, J. B., & Plomin, R. 

(2019). Genomic prediction of cognitive traits in childhood and adolescence. 

Molecular Psychiatry , 24 (6), 819 –827. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380 -019 -

0394 -4

Asbury, K., Wachs, T. D., & Plomin, R. (2005). Environmental moderators of genetic 

influence on verbal and nonverbal abilities in early childhood. Intelligence ,

33 (6), 643 –661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2005.03.008 

Bayley, N. (1993). Bayley Scales of Infant Development . San Antonio: Psychological 

Corporation. 

Behar, L. B. (1977). The Preschool Behavior Questionnaire. Journal of Abnormal 

Child Psychology , 5(3), 265 –275. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00913697 

Bouchard, T. J. (2013). The Wilson Effect: The Increase in Heritability of IQ With Age. 

Twin Research and Human Genetics , 16 (5), 923 –930. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/thg.2013.54 

Breit, M., Scherrer, V., Tucker -Drob, E. M., & Preckel, F. (2024). The stability of 

cognitive abilities: A meta -analytic review of longitudinal studies. 

Psychological Bulletin , 150 (4), 399 –439. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000425 

Davies, G., Lam, M., Harris, S. E., Trampush, J. W., Luciano, M., Hill, W. D., 

Hagenaars, S. P., Ritchie, S. J., Marioni, R. E., Fawns -Ritchie, C., Liewald, D. 

C. M., Okely, J. A., Ahola -Olli, A. V., Barnes, C. L. K., Bertram, L., Bis, J. C., 

Burdick, K. E ., Christoforou, A., DeRosse, P., … Deary, I. J. (2018). Study of 

300,486 individuals identifies 148 independent genetic loci influencing general 

cognitive function. Nature Communications , 9(1), 2098. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -018 -04362 -x

de la Fuente, J., Davies, G., Grotzinger, A. D., Tucker -Drob, E. M., & Deary, I. J. 

(2021). A general dimension of genetic sharing across diverse cognitive traits 

inferred from molecular data. Nature Human Behaviour , 5(1), 49 –58. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -020 -00936 -2

Deary, I. J. (2012). Intelligence. Annual Review of Psychology , 63 (1), 453 –482. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -psych -120710 -100353 

Demange, P. A., Malanchini, M., Mallard, T. T., Biroli, P., Cox, S. R., Grotzinger, A. D., 

Tucker -Drob, E. M., Abdellaoui, A., Arseneault, L., van Bergen, E., Boomsma, 

D. I., Caspi, A., Corcoran, D. L., Domingue, B. W., Harris, K. M., Ip, H. F., 

Mitchell, C., Moffitt, T. E., Poulton, R., … Nivard, M. G. (2021). Investigating 

the genetic architecture of noncognitive skills using GWAS -by -subtraction. 

Nature Genetics , 53 (1), 35 –44. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588 -020 -00754 -2

Dionne, G., Dale, P. S., Boivin, M., & Plomin, R. (2003). Genetic Evidence for 

Bidirectional Effects of Early Lexical and Grammatical Development. Child 

Development , 74 (2), 394 –412. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -8624.7402005 

Durbin, R. (2014). Efficient haplotype matching and storage using the positional 

Burrows –Wheeler transform (PBWT). Bioinformatics , 30 (9), 1266 –1272. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu014 

Enders, C. K., & Bandalos, D. L. (2001). The Relative Performance of Full 

Information Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Missing Data in Structural 

Equation Models. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal ,

8(3), 430 –457. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15328007SEM0803_5 

Fenson, L., Pethick, S., Renda, C., Cox, J. L., Dale, P. S., & Reznick, J. S. (2000). 

Short -form versions of the MacArthur Communicative Development 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 32 

Inventories. Applied Psycholinguistics , 21 (1), 95 –116. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716400001053 

Fenson, L., Philip, S., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D. J., Bates, E., Hartung, J. P., Pethick, 

S., & Reilly, J. S. (1993). The MacArthur communicative development 

inventories. Users guide and technical manual. San Diego: Singular 

Publishing Group. 

Genç, E., Schlüter, C., Fraenz, C., Arning, L., Metzen, D., Nguyen, H. P., Voelkle, M. 

C., Streit, F., Güntürkün, O., Kumsta, R., & Ocklenburg, S. (2021). Polygenic 

Scores for Cognitive Abilities and Their Association with Different Aspects of 

General Inte lligence —A Deep Phenotyping Approach. Molecular 

Neurobiology , 58 (8), 4145 –4156. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035 -021 -02398 -7

GOAL (2002). GOAL Formative Assessment: Key Stage 3. London: Hodder & 

Stoughton. 

Goodman, R. (1997). The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: A Research Note. 

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 38 (5), 581 –586. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469 -7610.1997.tb01545.x 

Gustavson, D. E., Borriello, G. A., Karhadkar, M. A., Rhee, S. H., Corley, R. P., Rhea, 

S. -A., DiLalla, L. F., Wadsworth, S. J., Friedman, N. P., & Reynolds, C. A. 

(2025). Stability of general cognitive ability from infancy to adulthood: A 

combined twin an d genomic investigation. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences , 122 (21), e2426531122. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2426531122 

Hammill, D. D., Brown, V. L., Larsen, S. C., & Wiederholt, J. L. (1994). Test of 

Adolescent and Adult Language (TOAL -3). Austin, TX, Pro -Ed. 

Haworth, C. M. A., Wright, M. J., Luciano, M., Martin, N. G., de Geus, E. J. C., van 

Beijsterveldt, C. E. M., Bartels, M., Posthuma, D., Boomsma, D. I., Davis, O. 

S. P., Kovas, Y., Corley, R. P., DeFries, J. C., Hewitt, J. K., Olson, R. K., Rhea, 

S. -A., Wa dsworth, S. J., Iacono, W. G., McGue, M., … Plomin, R. (2010). The 

heritability of general cognitive ability increases linearly from childhood to 

young adulthood. Molecular Psychiatry , 15 (11), 1112 –1120. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2009.55 

Hayiou -Thomas, M. E., Dale, P. S., & Plomin, R. (2012). The etiology of variation in 

language skills changes with development: A longitudinal twin study of 

language from 2 to 12 years. Developmental Science , 15 (2), 233 –249. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -7687.2011.01119.x 

Hill, W. D., Davies, G., Liewald, D. C., McIntosh, A. M., & Deary, I. J. (2016). Age -

Dependent Pleiotropy Between General Cognitive Function and Major 

Psychiatric Disorders. Biological Psychiatry , 80 (4), 266 –273. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.033 

Hill, W. D., Marioni, R. E., Maghzian, O., Ritchie, S. J., Hagenaars, S. P., McIntosh, 

A. M., Gale, C. R., Davies, G., & Deary, I. J. (2019). A combined analysis of 

genetically correlated traits identifies 187 loci and a role for neurogenesis and 

myelinati on in intelligence. Molecular Psychiatry , 24 (2), 169 –181. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380 -017 -0001 -5

Hubers, N., Page, C. M., Pool, R., Mbarek, H., Lambalk, N., Mijatovic, V., Ligthart, L., 

Van Dongen, J., Corfield, E. C., Beck, J. J., Ehli, E. A., Martin, N. G., 

Willemsen, G., Håberg, S., Harris, J. R., Hottenga, J. -J., & Boomsma, D. I. 

(2024). Polygenic Scores for Dizygotic Twinning: Insights into the Genetic 

Architecture of Female Fertility . Genetic and Genomic Medicine. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.02.24318308 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 33 

Kaplan, E., Fein, D., Kramer, J., Delis, D., & Morris, R. (1999). WISC -III as a Process 

Instrument (WISC -III -PI) . New York, NY: Psychological Corp. 

Kvalvik, E. H., Wang, Y., Walhovd, K. B., Lyngstad, T. H., & Røgeberg, O. (2025). 

Beyond years of schooling: Shifting genetic influences across educational 

milestones in two Norwegian cohorts (p. 2025.10.08.680992). bioRxiv. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.08.680992 

Lam, M., Chen, C. -Y., Ge, T., Xia, Y., Hill, D. W., Trampush, J. W., Yu, J., Knowles, 

E., Davies, G., Stahl, E. A., Huckins, L., Liewald, D. C., Djurovic, S., Melle, I., 

Christoforou, A., Reinvang, I., DeRosse, P., Lundervold, A. J., Steen, V. M., … 

Lencz, T. (2021). Identifying nootropic drug targets via large -scale cognitive 

GWAS and transcriptomics. Neuropsychopharmacology , 46 (10), 1788 –1801. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386 -021 -01023 -4

Lin, Y., Procopio, F., Keser, E., Kawakami, K., Rimfeld, K., Malanchini, M., & Plomin, 

R. (2025). Polygenic Score Prediction Within and Between Sibling Pairs for 

Intelligence, Cognitive Abilities, and Educational Traits From Childhood to 

Early Adulthood. Intelligence & Cognitive Abilities , 1(1). 

https://doi.org/10.65550/001c.140654 

Lockhart, C., Bright, J., Ahmadzadeh, Y., Breen, G., Bristow, S., Boyd, A., Downs, J., 

Hotopf, M., Palaiologou, E., Rimfeld, K., Maxwell, J., Malanchini, M., 

McAdams, T. A., McMillan, A., Plomin, R., & Eley, T. C. (2023). Twins Early 

Development Study (TED S): A genetically sensitive investigation of mental 

health outcomes in the mid ‐twenties. JCPP Advances , 3(2), e12154. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/jcv2.12154 

Loh, P. -R., Danecek, P., Palamara, P. F., Fuchsberger, C., A Reshef, Y., K Finucane, 

H., Schoenherr, S., Forer, L., McCarthy, S., Abecasis, G. R., Durbin, R., & L 

Price, A. (2016). Reference -based phasing using the Haplotype Reference 

Consortium panel. Nature Genetics , 48 (11), 1443 –1448. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3679 

Lyons, M. J., Panizzon, M. S., Liu, W., McKenzie, R., Bluestone, N. J., Grant, M. D., 

Franz, C. E., Vuoksimaa, E. P., Toomey, R., Jacobson, K. C., Reynolds, C. A., 

Kremen, W. S., & Xian, H. (2017). A longitudinal twin study of general 

cognitive ability ove r four decades. Developmental Psychology , 53 (6), 1170 –

1177. https://doi.org/10.1037/dev0000303 

Maier, R. M., Zhu, Z., Lee, S. H., Trzaskowski, M., Ruderfer, D. M., Stahl, E. A., 

Ripke, S., Wray, N. R., Yang, J., Visscher, P. M., & Robinson, M. R. (2018). 

Improving genetic prediction by leveraging genetic correlations among human 

diseases and traits. Nature Communications , 9(1), 989. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -017 -02769 -6

Malanchini, M., Allegrini, A. G., Nivard, M. G., Biroli, P., Rimfeld, K., Cheesman, R., 

von Stumm, S., Demange, P. A., van Bergen, E., Grotzinger, A. D., Raffington, 

L., De la Fuente, J., Pingault, J. -B., Tucker -Drob, E. M., Harden, K. P., & 

Plomin, R. (20 24). Genetic associations between non -cognitive skills and 

academic achievement over development. Nature Human Behaviour , 1 –13. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -024 -01967 -9

Malanchini, M., Rimfeld, K., Gidziela, A., Cheesman, R., Allegrini, A. G., Shakeshaft, 

N., Schofield, K., Packer, A., Ogden, R., McMillan, A., Ritchie, S. J., Dale, P. 

S., Eley, T. C., von Stumm, S., & Plomin, R. (2021). Pathfinder: A gamified 

measure to i ntegrate general cognitive ability into the biological, medical, and 

behavioural sciences. Molecular Psychiatry , 26 (12), Article 12. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380 -021 -01300 -0

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 34 

Malanchini, M., Rimfeld, K., Shakeshaft, N. G., McMillan, A., Schofield, K. L., Rodic, 

M., Rossi, V., Kovas, Y., Dale, P. S., Tucker -Drob, E. M., & Plomin, R. (2020). 

Evidence for a unitary structure of spatial cognition beyond general 

intelligence. Npj Science of Learning , 5(1), 9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539 -

020 -0067 -8

Markwardt, F. C. (1997). Peabody Individual Achievement Test —Revised, Circle 

Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

McCarthy, D. (1972). McCarthy Scales of Children’s Abilities . Psychological 

Corporation. 

McCarthy, S. (2016). A reference panel of 64,976 haplotypes for genotype 

imputation. Nature Genetics , 48 (10), 1279 –1283. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3643 

Okbay, A., Wu, Y., Wang, N., Jayashankar, H., Bennett, M., Nehzati, S. M., 

Sidorenko, J., Kweon, H., Goldman, G., Gjorgjieva, T., Jiang, Y., Hicks, B., 

Tian, C., Hinds, D. A., Ahlskog, R., Magnusson, P. K. E., Oskarsson, S., 

Hayward, C., Campbell, A., … Yo ung, A. I. (2022). Polygenic prediction of 

educational attainment within and between families from genome -wide 

association analyses in 3 million individuals. Nature Genetics , 54 (4), 437 –449. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588 -022 -01016 -z

Oliver, B., Dale, P. S., & Plomin, R. (2004). Verbal and nonverbal predictors of early 

language problems: An analysis of twins in early childhood back to infancy. 

Journal of Child Language , 31 (3), 609 –631. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000904006221 

Petrill, S. A., Saudino, K. S., Wilkerson, B., & Plomin, R. (2001). Genetic and 

environmental molarity and modularity of cognitive functioning in 2 -year -old 

twins. Intelligence , 29 (1), 31 –43. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0160 -

2896(00)00041 -6

Plomin, R. (1994). Genetics and experience: The interplay between nature and 

nurture (pp. xvi, 189). Sage Publications, Inc. 

Plomin, R. (2019). Blueprint: How DNA makes us who we are . Penguin Books. 

Plomin, R., & von Stumm, S. (2018). The new genetics of intelligence. Nature 

Reviews Genetics , 19 (3), 148 –159. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2017.104 

Plomin, R., & von Stumm, S. (2022). Polygenic scores: Prediction versus 

explanation. Molecular Psychiatry , 27 (1), Article 1. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380 -021 -01348 -y

Privé, F., Arbel, J., & Vilhjálmsson, B. J. (2021). LDpred2: Better, faster, stronger. 

Bioinformatics , 36 (22 –23), 5424 –5431. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa1029 

Procopio, F., Liao, W., Rimfeld, K., Malanchini, M., von Stumm, S., Allegrini, A. G., & 

Plomin, R. (2025). Multi -polygenic score prediction of mathematics, reading, 

and language abilities independent of general cognitive ability. Molecular 

Psychiatry , 30 (2), 414 –422. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380 -024 -02671 -w

Raven, J. C., Court, J. H., & Raven, J. (1996). Manual for Raven’s Progressive 

Matrices and Vocabulary Scales . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Mill Hill vocabulary scale . Oxford: 

OPP. 

Rietveld, C. A., Esko, T., Davies, G., Pers, T. H., Turley, P., Benyamin, B., Chabris, C. 

F., Emilsson, V., Johnson, A. D., Lee, J. J., Leeuw, C. D., Marioni, R. E., 

Medland, S. E., Miller, M. B., Rostapshova, O., Van Der Lee, S. J., 

Vinkhuyzen, A. A. E., Amin, N., Conley, D., … Koellinger, P. D. (2014). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.695378 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Charting cognitive development using adult ‘polygenic g scores’ 35 

Common genetic variants associated with cognitive performance identified 

using the proxy -phenotype method. Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences , 111 (38), 13790 –13794. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1404623111 

Rimfeld, K., Shakeshaft, N. G., Malanchini, M., Rodic, M., Selzam, S., Schofield, K., 

Dale, P. S., Kovas, Y., & Plomin, R. (2017). Phenotypic and genetic evidence 

for a unifactorial structure of spatial abilities. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences , 114 (10), 2777 –2782. (world). 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1607883114 

Saudino, K. J., Dale, P. S., Oliver, B., Petrill, S. A., Richardson, V., Rutter, M., 

Simonoff, E., Stevenson, J., & Plomin, R. (1998). The validity of parent ‐based 

assessment of the cognitive abilities of 2 ‐year ‐olds. British Journal of 

Developmental Psychology , 16 (3), 349 –362. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044 -

835X.1998.tb00757.x 

Savage, J. E., Jansen, P. R., Stringer, S., Watanabe, K., Bryois, J., de Leeuw, C. A., 

Nagel, M., Awasthi, S., Barr, P. B., Coleman, J. R. I., Grasby, K. L., 

Hammerschlag, A. R., Kaminski, J. A., Karlsson, R., Krapohl, E., Lam, M., 

Nygaard, M., Reynolds, C . A., Trampush, J. W., … Posthuma, D. (2018). 

Genome -wide association meta -analysis in 269,867 individuals identifies new 

genetic and functional links to intelligence. Nature Genetics , 50 (7), 912 –919. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588 -018 -0152 -6

Selzam, S., Coleman, J. R. I., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., & Plomin, R. (2018). A 

polygenic p factor for major psychiatric disorders. Translational Psychiatry ,

8(1), 1 –9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398 -018 -0217 -4

Smith, P., Fernandes, C., & Strand, S. (2001). Cognitive Abilities Test 3 (CAT3) .

Windsor: nferNELSON. 

Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K., & Rashotte, C. A. (1999). TOWRE (Test of Word 

Reading Efficiency); Austin, Texas: Pro -Ed .

Visscher, P. M., Yengo, L., Cox, N. J., & Wray, N. R. (2021). Discovery and 

implications of polygenicity of common diseases. Science , 373 (6562), 1468 –

1473. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abi8206 

Wainschtein, P., Zhang, Y., Schwartzentruber, J., Kassam, I., Sidorenko, J., Fiziev, P. 

P., Wang, H., McRae, J., Border, R., Zaitlen, N., Sankararaman, S., Goddard, 

M. E., Zeng, J., Visscher, P. M., Farh, K. K. -H., & Yengo, L. (2025). Estimation 

and mappin g of the missing heritability of human phenotypes. Nature , 1 –9. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -025 -09720 -6

Wechsler, D. (1992). Wechsler intelligence scale for children (3rd Ed. UK); The 

Psychological Corporation .

Wiig, E. H., Secord, W., & Sabers, D. (1989). Test of Language Competence —

Expanded Edition. San Antonio, TX, The Psychological Corporation .

Wilding, K., Wright, M., & von Stumm, S. (2024). Using dna to predict education: A 

meta -analytic review. Educational Psychology Review , 36 (3), 102. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648 -024 -09928 -4

Williams, C. M., Labouret, G., Wolfram, T., Peyre, H., & Ramus, F. (2023). A General 

Cognitive Ability Factor for the UK Biobank. Behavior Genetics , 53 (2), 85 –

100. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10519 -022 -10127 -6

Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., & Mather, N. (2001). Woodcock -Johnson III. 

Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing .