Title: Dialogue Agents that Share Family Information to Strengthen Grandparent-Grandchild Relationships

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12310v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 00:34:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Dialogue Agents that Share Family Information to Strengthen Grandparent–Grandchild Relationships 

# Seiya Mitsuno 1* , Midori Ban 1, Hiroshi Ishiguro 1, Yuichiro Yoshikawa 1

> 1*

Graduate School of Engineering Science, The University of Osaka, 1-3, Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, 560-8531, Osaka, Japan. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): mitsuno.seiya.es@osaka-u.ac.jp; Contributing authors: ban@irl.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp; ishiguro@irl.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp; y.yoshikawa.es@osaka-u.ac.jp; 

Abstract 

Social isolation among older adults has become a critical concern, as reduced opportunities for con-versation and weakened family relationships negatively affect mental health. This study proposes a dialogue agent that supports older adults by fostering both a relationship with the agent and a rela-tionship with their grandchild through sharing everyday information. The agent operates on a chatbot platform and engages in daily conversations with older adults and their grandchildren, exchanging information gathered from each party to enhance conversational engagement and social connection. We conducted a ten-day empirical experiment with 108 grandparent–grandchild pairs. The results suggest that older adults became more willing to interact with the proposed agent, which shared information about their grandchildren, and that the psychological connection between grandparents and grandchildren was strengthened. Furthermore, daily interactions with the agent were associated with reduced anxiety in both older adults and their grandchildren. These findings indicate that a dia-logue agent that shares personal information can be an effective approach to supporting older adults by simultaneously offering conversational opportunities and promoting family connectedness. Over-all, this study provides valuable insights into the design of dialogue agents that effectively address social isolation among older adults.  

> Keywords: Dialogue Agent, Older Adults, Family Information Sharing, Social Connection, Mental Health

# 1 Introduction 

In recent years, social isolation among older adults has emerged as a serious concern due to its nega-tive effects on mental health (Holt-Lunstad 2024). Social isolation is defined as a lack of social inter-action and connection with others (Valtorta and Hanratty 2012; Nakou et al. 2025), and is often caused by reduced opportunities for daily conver-sation and weakened ties with family, neighbors, and local communities (Donovan and Blazer 2020; Suragarn et al. 2021). This issue is particularly pronounced in Japan, where demographic and social changes have intensified the risk of isola-tion (Hirayama 2021; Hisata et al. 2023; Sasaki et al. 2023). One key factor in this context is the rise of nuclear families, which has led to more older adults living apart from their chil-dren and grandchildren (Hirayama 2021), thereby reducing routine contact with family members (Hisata et al. 2023). At the same time, urbaniza-tion in Japan has contributed to the weakening of 1

> arXiv:2604.12310v1 [cs.HC] 14 Apr 2026

local communities, which limits opportunities for older adults to interact with neighbors or commu-nity members (Sasaki et al. 2023). Indeed, it has been reported that 61.1% of older adults living alone in Japan communicate with others only once every two to three days or less (Cabinet Office, Government of Japan 2024). Such limited social interaction and connection have been linked to increased risks of dementia and depression, and are recognized as major contributors to chronic anxiety and loneliness (Shen et al. 2022; Holt-Lunstad 2024; Valtorta and Hanratty 2012; Nakou et al. 2025). Therefore, it is essential to provide older adults with opportunities for social inter-action and meaningful connections as a form of psychological and social support. To address this issue, dialogue agents, such as chatbots, have been increasingly developed to support older adults by providing conversa-tional opportunities and a sense of connection (An et al. 2025; Chou et al. 2024; Ryu et al. 2020). Unlike human counselors or caregivers, dialogue agents are not limited by human resources and can remain available at any time. Their ability to deliver immediate and continuous responses regardless of time and place enables them to offer stable opportunities for social interaction and to foster a sense of connection with the agent in daily life (Mitsuno et al. 2022; Klopfenstein et al. 2017). Such continuous engagement may enhance older adults’ mental health (Shen et al. 2022; Holt-Lunstad 2024; Valtorta and Hanratty 2012; Nakou et al. 2025). Indeed, several studies have shown that sustained interaction with dialogue agents over periods of several weeks can alleviate anx-iety and depression among older adults (Chou et al. 2024; Ryu et al. 2020), underscoring their potential to support older adults’ mental health. However, relying solely on dialogue agents is unlikely to be sufficient to support socially isolated older adults (Shen et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2025) and could even pose long-term risks (Fang et al. 2025). For example, Fang et al. (2025) reported that when individuals with limited human connections interact exclusively with agents, they may develop excessive dependence, which increases loneliness and reduces engagement with others. In addition, the responses of dialogue agents are often per-ceived as more superficial and less empathetic than those of humans, suggesting that conversa-tions with humans remain essential, particularly in               

> Fig. 1Overview of the proposed dialogue agent. The agent serves as a conversational partner for both older adults and their grandchildren and shares information between them.

situations requiring empathy, such as when shar-ing personal concerns (Shen et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2025). Overall, these findings indicate that effec-tive support for older adults requires not only interaction with agents but also mechanisms that actively foster human relationships. Motivated by this need, we propose an infor-mation sharing approach in which the agent shares information obtained from one user with another during interactions. By sharing everyday informa-tion, such as daily activities and personal prefer-ences, the agent can help users become more aware of each other’s lives, thereby promoting mutual understanding and strengthening their sense of connection. In this way, information sharing may enable dialogue agents to go beyond serving as conversational partners and function as bridges that support human–human relationships. In par-ticular, this study focuses on a dialogue agent that shares information between older adults and their grandchildren, given that prior research has shown that grandchildren represent a uniquely impor-tant source of psychological value for older adults (Lai et al. 2021; Yang and Yin 2022; Di Gessa et al. 2020). Based on this perspective, we aim to develop a dialogue agent that supports both the relationship between older adults and the agent and that between older adults and their grandchildren. An overview of the proposed dialogue agent is shown in Figure 1. The agent serves as a conver-sational partner for both older adults and their grandchildren and shares information between them. In practice, it engages in one-on-one daily conversations separately with older adults and their grandchildren. Through these interactions, the agent collects information about each user (e.g., daily events) and periodically shares this information with the other party (e.g., “Your 2grandchild mentioned that he studied with afriend at a cafe today”). By sharing such infor-mation, the dialogue agent enables older adults and their grandchildren to learn more about each other and provides opportunities for developing their relationship. As strengthened social relation-ships can mitigate social isolation among older adults and thereby alleviate anxiety and depres-sive symptoms (Shen et al. 2022; Holt-Lunstad 2024; Valtorta and Hanratty 2012; Nakou et al. 2025), the proposed agent has the potential to contribute to improvements in mental health. The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-lows. Section 2 presents our hypotheses regarding the effects of the proposed agent. Next, Section 3 reviews related work on agents for supporting older adults and those that share information between users. Then, Section 4 describes the design of the proposed dialogue agent, followed by Section 5, which reports on an experiment evaluating its effectiveness. Finally, Sections 6and 7 discuss the implications of our findings and conclude the paper. 

# 2 Hypotheses 

We formulated the following hypotheses regarding the effectiveness of the proposed dialogue agent, which shares information between users during conversations. 

# 2.1 Enhancing Willingness to Interact with the Agent 

The proposed agent is designed to function as a daily conversational partner, providing users with opportunities for dialogue and a sense of connection. To achieve its intended effects, it is essential that users remain motivated to continue interacting with the agent over time. Sustained engagement enables the agent to repeatedly offer conversational opportunities and to accumulate information that can be shared between users. Prior research suggests that people have an intrinsic interest in learning about others (Way and Taffe 2024; Renner 2006), and that receiving such information can motivate continued inter-action with an agent (Mitsuno et al. 2022). In particular, information about close others, such as family members, is likely to be especially engaging and personally meaningful (Lai et al. 2021; Yang and Yin 2022; Di Gessa et al. 2020). Therefore, we expect that our proposed agent, by serving not only as a conversational partner but also as a source of information about users’ family members, can enhance users’ motivation to inter-act with the agent. Based on this reasoning, we propose the following hypotheses: 

H1a: The proposed agent will increase older adults’ willingness to interact with the agent by sharing information about their grandchildren. 

H1b: The proposed agent will increase grand-children’s willingness to interact with the agent by sharing information about their grandparents. 

# 2.2 Strengthening the Grandparent–Grandchild Connection 

By sharing personal information about each user with the other, the proposed agent has the potential to positively influence the relationship between older adults and their grandchildren. Prior studies have suggested that learning about another person’s daily life and experiences can reduce emotional distance and promote relational closeness (Fu et al. 2021; Koshino et al. 2024). Accordingly, we expect that the mutual sharing of personal updates through the agent will fos-ter a stronger sense of connection between them. Therefore, we hypothesize that: 

H2: The proposed agent will strengthen the sense of connection between older adults and their grandchildren by sharing information about each other. 

# 2.3 Improving Users’ Mental Health 

Finally, the proposed agent may also have bene-ficial effects on the mental health of both older adults and grandchildren. By sharing personal information between them, the agent is expected to increase users’ willingness to engage in con-versations with the agent (H1) and to strengthen the psychological connection between older adults and their grandchildren (H2). As increased oppor-tunities for social interaction and stronger inter-personal connections are associated with reduced anxiety and depressive symptoms (Shen et al. 2022; Holt-Lunstad 2024; Valtorta and Hanratty 2012; Nakou et al. 2025), these effects are likely 3to contribute to improved mental health out-comes. Based on this perspective, we propose the following hypotheses: 

H3a: The proposed agent will contribute to improving older adults’ mental health by sharing information about their grandchildren. 

H3b: The proposed agent will contribute to improving grandchildren’s mental health by shar-ing information about their grandparents. 

# 3 Related Work 

# 3.1 Dialogue Agents for Supporting Older Adults 

As population aging progresses (Xi et al. 2025), increasing attention has been directed toward interactive technologies aimed at supporting older adults (Wada and Shibata 2006; Tan et al. 2024; Broekens et al. 2009). In particular, many stud-ies have focused on developing dialogue agents that provide conversational opportunities for older adults (Abdollahi et al. 2017; Nishio et al. 2021; Ryu et al. 2020). For example, Abdollahi et al. (Abdollahi et al. 2017) proposed Ryan, a compan-ion robot designed for older adults, and showed that interacting with the robot on a daily basis improved users’ mental health. Similarly, Nishio et al. (2021) developed a system in which two dia-logue robots collaboratively engaged with older adults, showing that this design increased self-disclosure and contributed to improvements in users’ emotional states. Furthermore, with the growing prevalence of smartphones among older adults (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Commu-nications 2023), chatbots have also been explored as accessible tools for providing conversational support to older adults. For instance, Ryu et al. (2020) developed the Mental Health Care Chatbot (MHCC), which provided daily conversations for older adults and was found to reduce depressive tendencies and anxiety. Together, these studies suggest that dialogue agents can serve as effec-tive tools for offering conversational opportunities, thereby supporting the mental health of older adults. However, most previous studies have primar-ily focused on one-to-one interactions between the agent and older adults. Such a design may lead to unintended consequences, particularly for socially isolated older adults, as prolonged reliance on agents as sole conversational partners can result in overdependence, reduced human interaction, and heightened feelings of loneliness (Fang et al. 2025). To address this issue, the present study aims to develop a dialogue agent that not only serves as a daily conversational partner for older adults but also facilitates communication and con-nection with their grandchildren. The proposed agent is designed to foster two types of relation-ships: the human–agent relationship between the older adult and the agent, and the human–human relationship between the older adult and the grandchild. Through this dual design, the agent is expected to enhance conversational opportunities and promote social connectedness through both human–agent and human–human interactions. 

# 3.2 Dialogue Agents as Information Sharing Partners 

The present study aims to develop a dialogue agent that simultaneously promotes relationship building between older adults and the agent, as well as between older adults and their grandchil-dren. To support this dual relationship formation, we focus on a dialogue strategy in which the agent shares information about other users during con-versations. Prior research in social psychology has shown that learning about others increases inter-est, familiarity, and intimacy, which in turn fosters the development of closer interpersonal relation-ships (Altman and Taylor 1973; Collins and Miller 1994; Guerrero et al. 2017). Building on these insights, a few HAI studies have explored the use of dialogue agents that share personal information to support interpersonal connectedness (Fu et al. 2021; Koshino et al. 2024). These studies sug-gest that sharing personal information through an agent may help foster interpersonal relationships. While prior work has demonstrated the poten-tial of such approaches, it has primarily focused on short-term interactions in controlled labora-tory environments. In contrast, the present study develops and empirically evaluates a dialogue agent for everyday use, with an emphasis on long-term interaction and practical deployment. Specif-ically, we focus on the following three aspects. 

1. Use of a chatbot platform. Previ-ous studies mainly employed physically embodied robots (Fu et al. 2021; Koshino et al. 2024). In 4this study, we adopt a chatbot as an alterna-tive dialogue platform to enable more practical and scalable deployment. A smartphone-based chatbot allows users to engage in conversations anytime and anywhere at minimal cost, mak-ing it well suited for large-scale, real-world use (Mitsuno et al. 2022; Klopfenstein et al. 2017). If this chatbot-based approach effectively sup-ports users through information sharing, it would demonstrate the potential of chatbots as an acces-sible and widely deployable solution. Moreover, smartphone use among older adults has increased substantially, with 90.2% of those in their 60s and 67.0% of those in their 70s using smart-phones in Japan (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications 2023). This trend suggests that chatbot-based approaches are increasingly feasible for supporting older adults in real-world settings. Based on this context, we develop a chat-bot designed to share personal information and support social connection between users. 

2. Long-term dialogue design. In contrast to prior work that focused on brief interactions (e.g., a few sessions lasting several minutes) (Fu et al. 2021; Koshino et al. 2024), this study aims to enable longer-term interactions between users and the agent. Supporting long-term engagement is important because it allows the agent to pro-vide continuous conversational opportunities and to accumulate personal information that can be shared over time, thereby enhancing both user– agent interaction and interpersonal connection. To achieve this, we design an agent capable of engaging in daily conversations over an extended period (e.g., ten days). Specifically, we implement agent-initiated dialogues that adapt to each user’s lifestyle. The agent estimates each user’s wake-up time and bedtime and automatically determines when to send messages, promoting intermittent interactions throughout the day (e.g., around five times per day). This intermittent yet agent-driven approach enables users to maintain interaction with low cognitive effort, facilitating long-term engagement. 

3. Evaluation with older adults. Pre-vious studies have primarily focused on young adults such as university students (Fu et al. 2021; Koshino et al. 2024). In this study, we instead focus on older adults as a key population for eval-uating real-world impact of information-sharing agents. In Japan, population aging is rapidly pro-gressing (Xi et al. 2025), and nuclear families have become increasingly common (Hirayama 2021). As a result, older adults are at increased risk of social isolation and represent an important group that may benefit from these technologies. However, few studies have explored the use of chatbots by older adults in naturalistic settings. To address this gap, we conduct a ten-day experiment involving older adults to examine the effectiveness of the proposed agent and to provide empirical evidence on its feasibility and potential psychological benefits. In summary, the present study advances the design of dialogue agents that share personal information in three key ways: (1) implementing such agents on a practically deployable chat-bot platform, (2) enabling sustained, long-term interactions through an agent-initiated, intermit-tent dialogue design that adapts to users’ daily routines, and (3) empirically evaluating the effec-tiveness of the proposed agent with older adults. This approach allows us to examine the potential of these agents in realistic and socially relevant contexts. 

# 4 Chatbot 

# 4.1 System Architecture 

Figure 2 illustrates the system architecture of the proposed chatbot. The chatbot operates on LINE, Japan’s most widely used messaging application (Steinberg 2020), and communicates with users via the LINE Messaging API. It utilizes a dataset that pairs anticipated user utterances with corre-sponding agent responses, along with a list of food names constructed from Cookpad’s data (Cook-pad Inc. 2015). Additionally, the system employs the Google Natural Language API for sentiment and entity analysis, the OpenAI API for generat-ing contextually appropriate responses, and a SQL database for storing and retrieving users’ dialogue histories. 

# 4.2 Dialogue Design 

When designing the agent’s dialogues, we incor-porate several features to facilitate long-term interaction. First, we implement an agent-initiated dialogue strategy, in which the agent proactively asks the user questions. This allows users to 5Table 1 Daily Dialogue flow. 

Context Timing Topic Example 

Morning 0.5 hours after waking up Sleep What time did you go to bed last night? Noon 4 hours after waking up Meal What did you eat for lunch? Afternoon 6 hours after waking up Location Where are you now? Evening 4 hours before sleeping Impression How was your day today? Night 2 hours before sleeping Plan What’s your schedule for tomorrow? - Unspecified ∗1 Value What is your favorite season?  

> *1

Questions about Value are asked with a 40% probability, replacing one of the other question types (Sleep, Meal, Location, Impression, or Plan).    

> Table 2 An example dialogue between the older adult and the agent, taken from an actual experimental session with the topic “Location.” ⟨grandchild name ⟩denotes the name of the user’s grandchild.

Turn Speaker Utterance 

1 Agent Hey, where are you spending time right now? 2 User I’m at home. I was cleaning the shoe rack. 3 Agent Oh, I see. I heard that ⟨grandchild name ⟩ was also spending some time at home the other day. Home really does sound like a comfortable place. 4 User Definitely. It’s nice and relaxing, and it’s cool in here. 5 Agent Yeah, even on hot days, it feels nice and cozy when you’re at home.  

> Fig. 2 System architecture.

engage in conversations without having to initiate them spontaneously. Such a design helps prevent users from discontinuing interactions after a short period of time due to difficulty in coming up with conversational topics. Next, we design the dialogues to be inter-mittent and synchronized with the user’s daily routine (Table 1). For example, the agent asks about users’ sleep in the morning, their activi-ties during the day, and their impressions of the day in the evening. The timing of each question is determined based on the user’s estimated wake-up time and bedtime, which are inferred from previ-ous responses to sleep-related questions. If a user does not respond by the next scheduled question, the agent skips the unanswered question and pro-ceeds. However, if no response is received for more than 20 hours, the agent assumes that the user will not reply and generates the next question. Addi-tionally, if no response is received within six hours after a question is generated, the agent sends a gentle reminder to encourage a reply. Furthermore, the dialogue between the user and the agent is designed to resemble a simple SMS-style exchange with a friend. Each conver-sation is short and casual, lasting approximately one minute, and covers light topics such as daily activities or personal preferences. Each dialogue sequence consists of five basic turns (Table 2): (1) the agent’s question, (2) the user’s answer, (3) the agent’s comment on the answer, (4) the user’s response to the comment, and (5) the agent’s reply, which could be either a text message or a sticker. The agent generates its utterances in turns 1, 3, and 5 using a combination of predefined rules and a large language model (LLM). Specifically, in turn 1, the agent selects a question from a 6predefined set prepared for each dialogue topic (Table 2). In turn 3, the agent’s comment on the user’s answer is generated either by rule-based template matching or by the LLM (details are described in Section 4.3). Finally, in turn 5, the agent’s reply is determined based on the content and length of the user’s message in turn 4. When the user’s message contains five or fewer char-acters and matches a predefined response (e.g., “Thank you”), the agent sends the corresponding reply (e.g., “You’re welcome”). If the short mes-sage does not match any predefined response, the agent sends a sticker instead. For longer utterances (more than five characters), the agent generates an appropriate text response using the LLM. When the user sends an additional message beyond turn 5, the agent no longer generates text responses using the LLM. Instead, it applies a simplified rule: if the new message matches a predefined response, the agent replies with the corresponding phrase; otherwise, it sends a sticker. 

# 4.3 Sharing Others’ Information 

A key feature of the proposed agent is its ability to share information about other users during con-versations. The agent produces such statements in turn 3. Examples include “I heard that Mike also had pasta,” “I heard that Mike is in Tokyo today,” and “I heard that Mike likes autumn.” To prevent the agent’s comments from becoming repetitive, these information-sharing statements are gener-ated only under specific conditions. Figure 3 illus-trates the decision flow used to determine the agent’s comment in turn 3. The agent’s comment in turn 3 could take one of four forms: (A) a response that shares information about other users ( Sharing info ), (B) a response generated from the agent’s memory of the user’s past statements ( Memory ), (C) a response based on the agent’s understanding of the content ( Comprehension ), or (D) a response generated by a language model (Generative ). These response types are evaluated sequentially in the following order: Sharing info , Memory ,

Comprehension , and finally Generative , until one applicable response type is found (Figure 3). A Sharing info response is generated only when two conditions are met: (A) the agent possesses relevant information about the other participant, and (B) a 40% probability condition  

> Fig. 3 Decision flow of the agent’s comment generation. The red components appear only in the proposed Sharing condition, while the baseline Non-sharing condition always follows the “No” path at this stage.

is satisfied. As an exception, this probability is increased to 80% for conversations on the topic of “Value,” as these are considered more conducive to interpersonal connection. A Memory response is produced when the user has previously made a similar statement. A Comprehension response is generated when the system successfully recognizes specific entities in the user’s utterance (e.g., food names or place names). Both of these responses are created using rule-based template matching. When none of the above conditions is satisfied, the agent generates a Generative response using the LLM. 

# 5 Experiment 

# 5.1 Experimental Design 

The experiment was conducted using a between-subjects design with two conditions: the Non-sharing and Sharing conditions. The Non-sharing condition represents a conventional chatbot designed to support interaction solely between a user and the agent, in which the chatbot engages in conversations with both older adults and their 7grandchildren but does not share any personal information between them. In contrast, the Shar-ing condition represents the proposed chatbot, which extends conventional human–agent interac-tion by sharing personal information about older adults and their grandchildren during their respec-tive conversations. More specifically, the Sharing info response was generated only in the Shar-ing condition, while it was always omitted in the Non-sharing condition (see Figure 3). 

# 5.2 Participants 

A total of 104 participants (52 pairs) took part in the experiment, each pair consisting of one older adult and one grandchild. The older adults (10 men, 42 women) had a mean age of 77.44 years (SD = 4 .00), while the grandchildren (25 men, 27 women) had a mean age of 22.25 years ( SD =4.32). All participants were native Japanese speak-ers living in Japan. Participants were required to own a smart-phone, be able to use LINE, a widely used mes-saging application in Japan (Steinberg 2020), and live separately from their paired partner. In addi-tion, older adults had to be 65 years or older, and grandchildren had to be 18 years or older. 

# 5.3 Procedure 

This experiment was approved by the Ethics Committee for Research Involving Human Sub-jects at the Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University. All participants pro-vided informed consent prior to participation. In the Sharing condition, participants were informed that portions of their conversation with the chat-bot might be shared with the other user (their partner). Before starting the interaction with the chat-bot, participants completed a pre-questionnaire. They then configured their smartphones to enable interaction with the chatbot via the LINE appli-cation. During this setup, each participant regis-tered their name as well as their typical wake-up time and bedtime for both weekdays and week-ends. Participants were instructed as follows: “You will receive several messages from the chatbot each day. Please reply to them. There is no spe-cific time requirement for your responses, but try to reply whenever possible.” Following this instruction, participants interacted with the chat-bot for ten consecutive days. After completing the ten-day interaction period, they completed a post-questionnaire. 

# 5.4 Measurements 

To examine Hypothesis 1, participants’ willing-ness to interact with the agent was assessed. In the post-questionnaire, participants rated their willingness to engage with the agent using the Intention to Use scale (Heerink et al. 2010), which is widely used to evaluate motivation for engag-ing with dialogue agents (Mahzoon et al. 2019; Mitsuno et al. 2024). In addition to this self-report measure, behavioral indicators of engage-ment were analyzed, as actual interaction pat-terns provide valuable complementary evidence of subjective motivation. Following Mitsuno et al. (2022), who evaluated willingness to interact with a chatbot, two behavioral measures were adopted: (1) Average Response Time, defined as the mean time interval between the chatbot’s message and the user’s reply, and (2) Number of Reminders, defined as the number of times the chatbot sent a follow-up message six hours after receiving no response. To test Hypothesis 2, changes in perceived connection between older adults and their grand-children were assessed. In both the pre- and post-questionnaires, participants rated perceived psychological closeness with their partner using the Inclusion of Other in the Self (IOS) scale (Aron et al. 1992). Furthermore, participants provided open-ended responses in the post-questionnaire, describing how their connection with their part-ner (the grandparent or grandchild) had changed through interactions with the chatbot. These qual-itative responses are particularly important for capturing subtle or individualized effects that may not emerge in aggregated quantitative scores. To evaluate Hypothesis 3, participants’ mental health was assessed using the Hospital Anxi-ety and Depression (HAD) scale (Zigmond and Snaith 1983), administered in both the pre-and post-questionnaires. This scale consists of two subscales: anxiety and depression. Further-more, in the post-questionnaire, participants pro-vided open-ended responses describing any per-ceived changes in their mental state resulting from their interactions with the chatbot. These 8responses capture subjective changes in mental health beyond what is reflected in scale-based measures. To detect satisficing behavior, in which par-ticipants respond carelessly or without sufficient attention (Oppenheimer et al. 2009), an item based on the Directed Questions Scale (DQS) (Maniaci and Rogge 2014) was included in the post-questionnaire. Specifically, participants were instructed to select a particular response option (“Please choose 1 for this item”) to verify their attentiveness. 

# 5.5 Results 

5.5.1 Frequency of Sharing info 

Responses 

In the Sharing condition, the chatbot selected a Sharing info response in 28.85% of all turn-3 comment opportunities. On average, participants received 11.60 such responses ( SD = 3 .88), with counts ranging from 4 to 20. These results con-firm that all participants in the Sharing condition were exposed to multiple Sharing info responses over the ten-day interaction period. 

5.5.2 Data Screening and Coding 

Screening 

Among the 104 participants, 23 older adults and 5 grandchildren failed the DQS item. Prior research in survey methodology suggests that older adults are more susceptible to satisficing behavior due to increased cognitive load and reduced attentional resources (Schneider et al. 2022). Accordingly, analyses of subjective measures (Intention to Use, IOS, and HAD) included only participants who passed the DQS check. Nevertheless, since our inspection of open-ended responses and chatbot interaction logs sug-gested that participants who failed the DQS item still engaged with the experiment in a meaningful and consistent manner, their data were retained for subsequent analyses. Specifically, for these participants, the open-ended responses regarding perceived connection averaged 10.79 characters in Japanese ( SD = 6.12), with lengths rang-ing from 2 to 23 characters; all responses were semantically interpretable. Similarly, their open-ended responses about mental health averaged 16.71 characters ( SD = 12 .62), ranging from 2 to 50 characters, and all statements conveyed mean-ingful content. Notably, the shortest two-character response was “no change.” Additionally, an exam-ination of chatbot interaction logs confirmed that these participants actively engaged with the chat-bot. The number of messages they sent during the ten-day period averaged 118.82 ( SD = 30 .15), ranging from 65 to 205, indicating that they par-ticipated consistently in the daily conversations. Therefore, their data were included in the behav-ioral analyses of engagement (Average Response Time and Number of Reminders). 

Coding of Open-Ended Responses 

Next, to enable quantitative analysis of the open-ended responses, we conducted a coding proce-dure. Two sets of responses, those concerning perceived connection and those concerning men-tal health, were coded by independent third-party coders who were blind to the study purpose and experimental condition. Each response was cate-gorized into one of three groups: positive change, no change, or negative change. For each measure, 20 coders (10 men and 10 women) performed the classification. The coders’ mean age was 41.70 years ( SD = 7 .66) for the perceived-connection responses and 40.90 years (SD = 10 .05) for the mental-health responses. Fleiss’s κ coefficients indicated high inter-rater agreement for both perceived connection ( κ =

.759, 95% CI [.748, .771], p < . 001) and mental health ( κ = .893, 95% CI [.881, .905], p < . 001). Following prior research on coding open-ended responses (T¨ ornberg 2025), the final label assigned to each participant’s response was determined by the category most frequently selected among the 20 coders. In the few instances where the top categories were tied (one case per measure), the authors discussed the responses and reached an agreement on the final label. 

5.5.3 Hypothesis Testing 

Willingness to Interact with the Agent (H1) 

We first examined the subjective measure assessed in the post-questionnaire, Intention to Use, by conducting Welch’s t tests separately for older adults and grandchildren. For older adults, there was no significant difference between the Shar-ing condition ( M = 3 .75, SD = 1 .13) and the 9Fig. 4 Number of reminders sent to users ( ∗p < . 05). A reminder was issued when a user did not reply to the chatbot for more than six hours. GP = grandparent; GC = grandchild. 

Non-sharing condition ( M = 3 .43, SD = 1 .43) (t(26 .59) = 0 .669, p = .509, d = 0 .24). Simi-larly, for grandchildren, no significant difference was observed between the Sharing condition ( M =2.71, SD = 1.39) and the Non-sharing condi-tion ( M = 2 .36, SD = 1 .51) ( t(44 .35) = 0 .816, 

p = .419, d = 0 .24). Next, we analyzed the behavioral mea-sures, Average Response Time and Number of Reminders, using Mann–Whitney U tests for older adults and grandchildren separately (Figure 4). For Average Response Time, among older adults, there was no significant difference between the Sharing condition (Mdn = 34 .41 min, IQR =[20 .70 , 63 .74]) and the Non-sharing condition (Mdn = 48 .64 min, IQR = [33 .75 , 73 .19]) ( U =274, p = .241, r = .16). Similarly, for grandchil-dren, no significant difference was found between the Sharing condition (Mdn = 67 .70 min, IQR = [39 .57 , 107 .93]) and the Non-sharing condition (Mdn = 76 .03 min, IQR = [48 .81 , 122 .95]) ( U =289, p = .370, r = .12). For Number of Reminders, older adults in the Sharing condition (Mdn = 0.00, IQR =[0 .00 , 1.00]) received significantly fewer reminders than those in the Non-sharing condition (Mdn = 1.00, IQR = [0 .00 , 2.75]) ( U = 212, p = .013, 

r = .35). In contrast, for grandchildren, no signifi-cant difference was observed between the Sharing condition (Mdn = 1 .00, IQR = [0 .00 , 3.00]) and the Non-sharing condition (Mdn = 2 .50, IQR = [1 .00 , 4.75]) ( U = 274, p = .241, r = .16). Taken together, these results suggest that older adults in the Sharing condition were less likely to leave the chatbot’s questions unanswered for extended periods, indicating a higher level of behavioral engagement with the agent. 

Grandparent–Grandchild Connection (H2) 

For the IOS scores assessed in the pre- and post-questionnaires, we conducted 2 (Condition: Sharing vs. Non-sharing) × 2 (Time: Pre vs. Post) mixed ANOVAs separately for older adults and grandchildren. For older adults, neither the main effect of Condition ( F (1 , 27) = 0 .004, p =

.951, η2 = .000) nor the main effect of Time (F (1 , 27) = 1 .810, p = .190, η2 = .063) was signifi-cant. The interaction effect was also not significant (F (1 , 27) = 0 .565, p = .459, η2 = .020). Likewise, for grandchildren, neither the main effect of Con-dition ( F (1 , 45) = 0 .309, p = .581, η2 = .007) nor the main effect of Time ( F (1 , 45) = 0 .565, 

p = .456, η2 = .012) was significant, and the inter-action was also not significant ( F (1 , 45) = 1 .319, 

p = .257, η2 = .028). Next, we examined changes in perceived con-nection based on the coded open-ended responses and conducted chi-square tests separately for older adults and grandchildren (Table 3). For older adults, a significant difference was observed between the Sharing condition (positive: 14, no change: 12, negative: 0) and the Non-sharing con-dition (positive: 4, no change: 21, negative: 1) (χ2(2) = 9.010, p = .011, V = .42). Resid-ual analysis showed that positive responses were significantly more frequent in the Sharing condi-tion (adjusted residual = 2.91), whereas no-change responses were significantly more frequent in the Non-sharing condition (adjusted residual = 2.59). A similar pattern was observed for grandchil-dren: a significant difference emerged between the Sharing condition (positive: 16, no change: 10, negative: 0) and the Non-sharing condition (posi-tive: 6, no change: 19, negative: 1) ( χ2(2) = 8 .339, 

p = .015, V = .40). Residual analysis again indicated significantly more positive responses in the Sharing condition (adjusted residual = 2.81) and significantly more no-change responses in the Non-sharing condition (adjusted residual = 2.51). These results suggest that participants in the Sharing condition perceived positive improve-ments in their connection with their partner through interactions with the chatbot. 10 Table 3 Coded results of changes in perceived connection. Numbers in parentheses indicate adjusted residuals, with asterisks denoting significance levels ( |r| ≥ 1.95: ∗, |r| ≥ 2.58: ∗∗ ). 

Condition Positive No change Negative 

Older adults Sharing 14 (2.91 ∗∗ ) 12 ( −2.59 ∗∗ ) 0 (1.01) Non-sharing 4 ( −2.91 ∗∗ ) 21 (2.59 ∗∗ ) 1 ( −1.01) Grandchildren Sharing 16 (2.81 ∗∗ ) 10 ( −2.51 ∗) 0 ( −1.01) Non-sharing 6 ( −2.81 ∗∗ ) 19 (2.51 ∗) 1 (1.01) 

Users’ Mental Health (H3) 

For the HAD scores assessed in the pre- and post-questionnaires, we conducted 2 (Condition: Sharing vs. Non-sharing) × 2 (Time: Pre vs. Post) mixed ANOVAs separately for older adults and grandchildren (Figure 5). For Anxiety, older adults showed a significant main effect of Time (F (1 , 27) = 10 .529, p = .003, η2 = .281), sug-gesting a decrease in anxiety over the course of interacting with the chatbot. In contrast, neither the main effect of Condition ( F (1 , 27) = 3 .002, 

p = .095, η2 = .100) nor the interaction effect (F (1 , 27) = 0 .069, p = .794, η2 = .003) was signif-icant. For grandchildren, the main effect of Time was also significant ( F (1 , 45) = 5 .715, p = .021, 

η2 = .113), again suggesting a reduction in anx-iety following the interaction with the chatbot. However, neither the main effect of Condition (F (1 , 45) = 0 .594, p = .445, η2 = .013) nor the interaction ( F (1 , 45) = 3 .796, p = .058, η2 = .078) was significant. For Depression, older adults did not show a significant main effect of Condition ( F (1 , 27) = 0.215, p = .647, η2 = .008), Time ( F (1 , 27) = 0.165, p = .688, η2 = .006), or interaction (F (1 , 27) = 1 .762, p = .196, η2 = .061). Similarly, for grandchildren, no significant main effect of Condition ( F (1 , 45) = 0 .371, p = .546, η2 = .008), Time ( F (1 , 45) = 0 .000, p = .987, η2 = .000), or interaction ( F (1 , 45) = 0 .631, p = .431, η2 = .014) was found. Next, we analyzed changes in mental health reflected in the coded open-ended responses and conducted chi-square tests separately for older adults and grandchildren (Table 4). For older adults, no significant difference was found between the Sharing condition (positive: 17, no change: 8, negative: 1) and the Non-sharing condition (posi-tive: 17, no change: 8, negative: 1) ( χ2(2) = 0 .000, 

p = 1 .000, V = .00). Similarly, for grandchildren, no significant difference was observed between the   

> Fig. 5 Anxiety scores before and after the interaction with the chatbot ( ∗p < . 05 ,∗∗ p < . 01). Error bars represent standard errors. GP = grandparent; GC = grandchild.

Sharing condition (positive: 12, no change: 13, negative: 1) and the Non-sharing condition (pos-itive: 13, no change: 11, negative: 2) ( χ2(2) =0.540, p = .763, V = .10). 

# 6 Discussion 

# 6.1 Willingness to Interact with the Agent (H1) 

Hypothesis 1 proposed that users’ willingness to interact with the agent would increase when the agent shared information about either the older adult or the grandchild during conversations. The experimental results showed that, among older adults, the behavioral measure Number of Reminders was significantly lower in the Shar-ing condition than in the Non-sharing condition. Given that reminders were sent when a user did not respond to the agent’s question for more than six hours, this result suggests that older adults were more motivated to engage with an agent that provided updates about their grandchild, leading to more active and consistent responses. This find-ing provides partial support for H1a, particularly from a behavioral perspective. One plausible explanation for this increased engagement lies in the unique psychological value 11 Table 4 Coded results of changes in mental health. Numbers in parentheses indicate adjusted residuals. 

Condition Positive No change Negative 

Older adults Sharing 17 (0.00) 8 (0.00) 1 (0.00) Non-sharing 17 (0.00) 8 (0.00) 1 (0.00) Grandchildren Sharing 12 ( −0.28) 13 (0.56) 1 ( −0.59) Non-sharing 13 (0.28) 11 ( −0.56) 2 (0.59) that grandchildren hold for older adults. Prior studies have shown that grandchildren provide older adults with a strong sense of purpose, mean-ing, and generativity (Lai et al. 2021; Yang and Yin 2022; Di Gessa et al. 2020). In light of this, conversations in which the agent shared every-day information about the grandchild may have been perceived as more attractive and enjoy-able, making interactions with the agent a more meaningful part of daily life. This increased will-ingness to interact with the agent is particularly important because it is essential for maintaining long-term engagement and for fostering a relation-ship between older adults and the agent (Mahzoon et al. 2019; Mitsuno et al. 2024), both of which are key factors in enabling effective conversational assistance for older adults. In contrast, no significant differences were observed between conditions in any of the subjec-tive or behavioral measures for grandchildren, and thus H1b was not supported. One possible reason for this contrast between older adults and grand-children is that they differ in the degree to which they are interested in each other’s daily lives. Although both groups may regard one another as important family members, prior work sug-gests that older adults tend to ascribe particularly strong psychological significance to their grand-children, extending beyond simple affection and relating to a sense of generational continuity (Lai et al. 2021). Given this asymmetry, the types of information shared by the agent in this study, such as meals, sleep times, and current locations, may have been sufficiently engaging for older adults but not inherently compelling for grand-children. Future research should therefore examine how to infer, collect, and share information about older adults that is likely to be more meaningful and appealing to grandchildren, thereby enabling reciprocal motivation to interact with the agent. 

# 6.2 Grandparent–Grandchild Connection (H2) 

We next examined Hypothesis 2, which proposed that sharing personal information through the agent would strengthen the connection between older adults and their grandchildren. The results provided partial support for this hypothesis. While no significant differences were observed between conditions in the IOS scale, the coded open-ended responses showed that participants in the Sharing condition reported positive changes in perceived connection significantly more often than those in the Non-sharing condition. To illus-trate the kinds of positive changes observed in the Sharing condition, we present several rep-resentative comments. Older adults wrote, for example, “I felt closer to my grandchild and came to understand more about their daily life” and “It made me want to see them.” Grandchildren expressed similar sentiments, stating “I learned unexpected things about my grandmother and discovered shared similarities, which made me feel closer to her” and “I feel more connected.” These responses suggest that sharing everyday updates helped the two better understand each other, which may in turn strengthened their psy-chological closeness. Social psychological research has shown that exposure to personal informa-tion about others increases interest, familiarity, and feelings of closeness, ultimately promoting the development of interpersonal relationships (Alt-man and Taylor 1973; Collins and Miller 1994; Guerrero et al. 2017). The observed enhancement in perceived connection aligns with this theoreti-cal background and indicates that even seemingly minor details from daily life may help individuals feel closer to one another. 

# 6.3 Users’ Mental Health (H3) 

The proposed agent was designed to increase users’ conversational opportunities and support 12 the development of social connectedness through two mechanisms: promoting dialogue between users and the agent (H1), and strengthening the psychological connection between older adults and their grandchildren (H2). These increased conver-sational opportunities and enhanced social con-nectedness may contribute to improvements in users’ mental health, particularly by reducing anx-iety and depressive symptoms (H3) (Shen et al. 2022; Holt-Lunstad 2024; Valtorta and Hanratty 2012; Nakou et al. 2025). The results showed that both older adults and grandchildren exhibited significant decreases in Anxiety scores from pre- to post-interaction in both the Sharing and Non-sharing condi-tions. In the open-ended responses as well, par-ticipants in both conditions frequently reported positive changes in their mental state, and nega-tive changes were almost never mentioned (with zero negative responses in the Sharing condition), although the overall distribution of responses did not differ significantly between conditions. Rep-resentative comments included: “Although it was brief, I felt enjoyment and a sense of fulfillment in talking every day” (older adult, Non-sharing); “It was enjoyable and fulfilling” (older adult, Sharing); “Through conversations with the bot, I was able to ease my usual feelings of loneliness” (grandchild, Non-sharing); and “I felt emotionally enriched” (grandchild, Sharing). These responses suggest that interacting with the agent, regardless of condition, provided a form of emotional support that may have contributed to improved mental health. Although users’ mental health improved over-all, the magnitude of improvement did not differ significantly between conditions, offering only par-tial support for H3, which predicted greater ben-efits in the Sharing condition. One explanation is that the expected benefits of the Sharing condi-tion, namely sustained engagement through infor-mation sharing and strengthened grandparent– grandchild relationships, likely require a longer period to accumulate before exerting measurable effects on mental health. Furthermore, mental health is influenced by multiple contextual fac-tors and exhibits substantial daily variability, making short-term changes difficult to attribute to condition-specific mechanisms (Gloster et al. 2017). Future work should therefore examine how sharing personal information influences engage-ment, relationship dynamics, and ultimately men-tal health over time. A longitudinal study span-ning several months to a year would enable a more precise assessment of these cumulative effects and provide deeper insight into how such communica-tion contributes to mental health. 

# 6.4 Limitations and Future Work 

As described in Section 4.2, the dialogue pro-vided by the proposed agent was intentionally designed to be short and lightweight in order to reduce cognitive and psychological burden for users, and to facilitate sustained engagement over time. However, prior research has shown that conversations involving deeper self-disclosure can play an important role in fostering human–agent relationships (Bickmore and Picard 2005; Mit-suno et al. 2026), and that sharing more private information may further enhance interpersonal relationships between users (Altman and Taylor 1973). Given this, it is possible that incorporat-ing more personal or emotionally rich topics could provide additional relational or emotional bene-fits. At the same time, introducing such content may increase users’ cognitive and psychological burden, suggesting the need to carefully balance these aspects in dialogue design. Therefore, future work should explore how to incorporate not only everyday events but also more private aspects of users’ lives, while maintaining usability, and examine the effects of such designs. However, enabling conversations about private matters introduces additional challenges. Because the proposed agent shares information from one user with the other, privacy protection becomes increasingly critical when handling sensitive con-tent. In the present study, participants were informed in advance that some of their mes-sages might be shared with their partner, and consent was obtained accordingly. Nevertheless, when dealing with more personal topics, it will be essential to provide mechanisms that allow users to exercise granular control over what informa-tion is shared, ensure transparency in the sharing process, and prevent accidental or inappropriate disclosure due to contextual misunderstanding. Hence, developing systems that robustly support these requirements for secure, user-controlled, and 13 transparent information sharing will be an impor-tant direction for future work. Furthermore, the experimental period in this study lasted only ten days, which may have been insufficient to fully observe changes such as strengthened relationships or improvements in mental health. These forms of psychological change typically accumulate gradually and may not manifest within a short time frame (Gloster et al. 2017). This limitation may partly explain why certain subjective measures, such as IOS and Depression, did not show significant changes. Longer-term longitudinal studies, spanning sev-eral months to a year, will be valuable for eluci-dating how information sharing through dialogue agents influences interpersonal relationships and mental health over time. 

# 7 Conclusion 

This study proposed a dialogue agent designed not only to support human–agent interaction but also to facilitate human–human relationships between users by sharing personal information. The agent operates on a chatbot platform and engages in daily conversations with both older adults and their grandchildren, sharing everyday information obtained from one user with the other. We conducted a ten-day field experiment with 104 grandparent–grandchild pairs to evalu-ate the effectiveness of the proposed agent. The results showed that, from a behavioral perspec-tive, older adults became more willing to inter-act with the agent when it shared information about their grandchild. In addition, based on open-ended responses, the perceived connection between grandparents and grandchildren showed positive changes in the Sharing condition. More-over, daily interactions with the agent were asso-ciated with reduced anxiety in both generations. Taken together, these findings indicate that a dialogue agent that shares personal information can be an effective approach for supporting older adults by simultaneously offering conversational opportunities and promoting family connected-ness. Future work should investigate how long-term use shapes relationship development and mental health trajectories, and further explore design strategies that enable safe, sustained, and meaningful information sharing. 

# Declarations 

Funding. This work was supported by the JST Moonshot R&D Program (Grant Number JPMJMS2011) for system development and JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number 24H00165) for data analysis. 

Conflict of interest. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

# References 

Abdollahi H, Mollahosseini A, Lane JT, et al (2017) A pilot study on using an intelli-gent life-like robot as a companion for elderly individuals with dementia and depression. In: 2017 IEEE-RAS 17th International Conference on Humanoid Robotics (Humanoids). ieeex-plore.ieee.org, pp 541–546 Altman I, Taylor DA (1973) Social penetration: The development of interpersonal relationships, vol 212. Holt, Rinehart & Winston Social pen-etration, Oxford, England An J, Yi S, Lyu Y, et al (2025) Conversational agents for older adults’ health: A systematic literature review. arXiv [csHC] [cs.HC] Aron A, Aron EN, Smollan D (1992) Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure of inter-personal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63(4):596–612 Bickmore TW, Picard RW (2005) Establishing and maintaining long-term human-computer relationships. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 12(2):293–327 Broekens J, Heerink M, Rosendal H, et al (2009) Assistive social robots in elderly care: a review. Gerontechnology 8(2):94–103 Cabinet Office, Government of Japan (2024) Annual report on the ageing society. URL https://www8.cao.go.jp/kourei/english/ annualreport/2024/pdf/2024.pdf Chou YH, Lin C, Lee SH, et al (2024) User-friendly chatbot to mitigate the psychological 14 stress of older adults during the COVID-19 pan-demic: Development and usability study. JMIR Formative Research 8:e49462 Collins NL, Miller LC (1994) Self-disclosure and liking: a meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin 116(3):457–475 Cookpad Inc. (2015) Cookpad data. Informatics Research Data Repository, National Institute of Informatics. (dataset). https://doi.org/10. 32130/idr.5.1 Di Gessa G, Bordone V, Arpino B (2020) Becom-ing a grandparent and its effect on well-being: The role of order of transitions, time, and gender. The journals of gerontology Series B, Psychological sciences and social sciences 75(10):2250–2262 Donovan NJ, Blazer D (2020) Social isolation and loneliness in older adults: Review and commentary of a national academies report. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 28(12):1233–1244 Fang CM, Liu AR, Danry V, et al (2025) How AI and human behaviors shape psychosocial effects of chatbot use: A longitudinal randomized con-trolled study. arXiv [csHC] [cs.HC] Fu C, Liu C, Ishi CT, et al (2021) Using an android robot to improve social connectedness by sharing recent experiences of group members in human-robot conversations. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters pp 1–1 Gloster AT, Mich´ e M, Wersebe H, et al (2017) Daily fluctuation of emotions and memories thereof: Design and methods of an experi-ence sampling study of major depression, social phobia, and controls. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 26(3) Guerrero LK, Andersen PA, Afifi WA (2017) Close Encounters: Communication in Relationships. SAGE Publications Heerink M, Kr¨ ose B, Evers V, et al (2010) Assess-ing acceptance of assistive social agent technol-ogy by older adults: the almere model. Interna-tional Journal of Social Robotics 2(4):361–375 Hirayama Y (2021) Housing, family, and life– course in post–growth japan. Japan Architec-tural Review 4(2):267–276 Hisata Y, Sugioka T, Yasaka A, et al (2023) Nega-tive association between loneliness and healthy state among rural residents in japan: a cross-sectional single region population-based survey. J Rural Med 18(2):70–78 Holt-Lunstad J (2024) Social connection as acritical factor for mental and physical health: evidence, trends, challenges, and future impli-cations. World Psychiatry 23(3):312–332 Klopfenstein LC, Delpriori S, Malatini S, et al (2017) The rise of bots: A survey of conversa-tional interfaces, patterns, and paradigms. In: Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Design-ing Interactive Systems. Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, DIS ’17, pp 555–565 Koshino A, Uchida T, Yoshikawa Y, et al (2024) Evaluation of dialogue motivation between users by a dialogue robot referring to com-mon preferences based on information content. Transactions of the Japanese Society for Artifi-cial Intelligence 39(3):IDS6–D 1–11 Lai DWL, Li J, Bai X (2021) To be or not to be: relationship between grandparent status and health and wellbeing. BMC Geriatr 21(1):204 Liu T, Giorgi S, Aich A, et al (2025) The illusion of empathy: How AI chatbots shape conversa-tion perception. Proc Conf AAAI Artif Intell 39(13):14327–14335 Mahzoon H, Ogawa K, Yoshikawa Y, et al (2019) Effect of self-representation of interaction his-tory by the robot on perceptions of mind and positive relationship: a case study on a home-use robot. Advanced Robotics 33(21):1112–1128 Maniaci MR, Rogge RD (2014) Caring about care-lessness: Participant inattention and its effects on research. Journal of Research in Personality 48:61–83 Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communica-tions (2023) Communications usage trend 15 survey 2023. URL https://www.soumu.go. jp/main sosiki/joho tsusin/eng/pressrelease/ 2024/6/7 1.html Mitsuno S, Yoshikawa Y, Ban M, et al (2022) Evaluation of a Daily Interactive Chatbot That Exchanges Information about Others through Long-Term Use in a Group of Friends. Trans-actions of the Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence 37(3):IDS–I 1–14 Mitsuno S, Yoshikawa Y, Ban M, et al (2024) Agreebot introduction dialogue in human-robot interaction: improving the acceptability of robot statements on incapable robotic experiences. Advanced Robotics pp 1–10 Mitsuno S, Ban M, Ishiguro H, et al (2026) Com-paring dialogue motivation in human–human and human–robot conversations: Role of topic depth and relationship closeness. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 8 Nakou A, Dragioti E, Bastas NS, et al (2025) Loneliness, social isolation, and living alone: a comprehensive systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression of mortality risks in older adults. Aging Clinical and Experimen-tal Research 37(1):29 Nishio T, Yoshikawa Y, Iio T, et al (2021) Actively listening twin robots for long-duration conver-sation with the elderly. ROBOMECH Journal 8(1):1–10 Oppenheimer DM, Meyvis T, Davidenko N (2009) Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 45(4):867– 872 Renner B (2006) Curiosity about people: the development of a social curiosity measure in adults. Journal of Personality Assessment 87(3):305–316 Ryu H, Kim S, Kim D, et al (2020) Simple and steady interactions win the healthy mental-ity: Designing a chatbot service for the elderly. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4(CSCW2):1–25 Sasaki N, Tabuchi T, Okubo R, et al (2023) Association of living condition using urbanisa-tion level and neighbourhood deprivation with loneliness and social isolation during COVID-19 pandemic: a cross-sectional study of the nationwide data in japan. BMJ Public Health 1(1):e000341 Schneider S, Junghaenel DU, Meijer E, et al (2022) Quality of survey responses at older ages predicts cognitive decline and mortality risk. Innovation in Aging 6(3):igac027 Shen C, Rolls ET, Cheng W, et al (2022) Associa-tions of social isolation and loneliness with later dementia. Neurology 99(2):e164–e175 Shen J, DiPaola D, Ali S, et al (2024) Empathy toward artificial intelligence versus human expe-riences and the role of transparency in mental health and social support chatbot design: Com-parative study. JMIR Ment Health 11(1):e62679 Steinberg M (2020) LINE as super app: Plat-formization in east asia. Social Media + Society 6(2):205630512093328 Suragarn U, Hain D, Pfaff G (2021) Approaches to enhance social connection in older adults: an integrative review of literature. Aging and Health Research 1(3):100029 Tan CK, Lou VWQ, Cheng CYM, et al (2024) Improving the social well-being of single older adults using the LOVOT social robot: Quali-tative phenomenological study. JMIR Human Factors 11(1):e56669 T¨ ornberg P (2025) Large language models out-perform expert coders and supervised classifiers at annotating political social media messages. Social Science Computer Review 43(6):1181– 1195 Valtorta N, Hanratty B (2012) Loneliness, isola-tion and the health of older adults: do we need a new research agenda? Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 105(12):518–522 Wada K, Shibata T (2006) Robot therapy in a care house - its sociopsychological and physiological effects on the residents. In: Proceedings 2006 16 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ieeexplore.ieee.org, pp 3966–3971 Way N, Taffe R (2024) Interpersonal curiosity: A missing construct in the field of human devel-opment. Human Development 69(2):1–12 Xi JY, Liang BH, Zhang WJ, et al (2025) Effects of population aging on quality of life and dis-ease burden: a population-based study. Global Health Research and Policy 10(1):2 Yang X, Yin D (2022) The protective effect of car-ing for grandchildren on the mental health of the elderly: A structural equation modeling anal-ysis. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19(3):1255 Zigmond AS, Snaith RP (1983) The hospital anx-iety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 67(6):361–370 17