Title: Play-Testing REMind: Evaluating an Educational Robot-Mediated Role-Play Game

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00300v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 00:18:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Play-Testing REMind : Evaluating an Educational Robot-Mediated Role-Play Game 

Elaheh Sanoubari 1, Neil Fernandes 2, Keith Rebello 2, Alicia Pan 2, Andrew Houston 3, and Kerstin Dautenhahn 2

Abstract — This paper presents REMind , an innovative ed-ucational robot-mediated role-play game designed to support anti-bullying bystander intervention among children. REMind 

invites players to observe a bullying scenario enacted by social robots, reflect on the perspectives of the characters, and rehearse defending strategies by puppeteering a robotic avatar. We evaluated REMind through a mixed-methods play-testing study with 18 children aged 9–10. The findings suggest that the experience supported key learning goals related to self-efficacy, perspective-taking, understanding outcomes of defending, and intervention strategies. These results highlight the promise of Robot-Mediated Applied Drama (RMAD) as a novel pedagog-ical framework to support Social-Emotional Learning. 

I. INTRODUCTION Peer bullying is a persistent problem in schools, with harmful consequences not only for victims, but also for the wider peer group witnessing it. Although many children dis-approve of bullying, they often remain passive as bystanders. This inaction is not simply a matter of apathy; rather, it is often shaped by social and emotional barriers such as fear of retaliation, uncertainty about what to do, low confidence, or concern about peer status [1]. Because bystander intervention can stop bullying in many cases, helping children move from silent disapproval to active defending is a critical challenge for anti-bullying interventions. Traditional anti-bullying in-struction often relies on explanation: telling children why bullying is harmful, what the right thing to do is, or what strategies they should ideally use. However, knowing what one should do does not necessarily prepare a child to act in an emotionally charged moment. Supporting bystander intervention requires opportunities for embodied, reflective, and situated practice, where children can rehearse possible strategies, consider consequences, and build confidence. Role-play situates learning in experience and allows learn-ers to engage with emotionally and socially complex situa-tions through active participation, which makes it a natural vehicle for developing skills [2]. Hence, it is especially well-suited to address the problem of bystander inaction in peer bullying. In this paper, we present REMind 1, an educational  

> This research was funded, in part, by the Canada Research Chair Pro-gramme in Socially Intelligent Robotics, and the NSERC Canada Graduate Scholarships – Doctoral (CGS D) program.
> 1Elaheh Sanoubari is with the Department of Systems Design Engineer-ing, University of Waterloo, Canada

esanouba@uwaterloo.ca  

> 2Neil Fernandes, Keith Rebello, Alicia Pan, and Kerstin Dautenhahn are with the Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Uni-versity of Waterloo, Canada

{n24ferna, k2rebell, a29pan, kdautenh }@uwaterloo.ca          

> 3Andrew Houston is with the Department of Communication Arts, University of Waterloo, Canada

houston@uwaterloo.ca    

> 1Short for Robots Empowering Mind s.

Fig. 1: REMind engages players in role-playing with three social robots to practice anti-bullying bystander intervention. robot-mediated role-play game designed to support anti-bullying bystander intervention. REMind invites children to observe a bullying scenario enacted by social robots (see Fig. 1), reflect on the perspectives of the characters, and rehearse intervention by puppeteering a robotic avatar through their own recorded voice and facial performance. In this way, we use robots not as tutors, but as embodied dramatic proxies through which children can simulate social situations, reflect on emotional nuances, and practice prosocial action. We report a play-testing study with 18 children aged 9– 10 that evaluated whether REMind supported key learning goals related to empathy, perspective-taking, outcome ex-pectations, defending strategies, and self-efficacy for de-fending peers. Our findings combine pre/post quantitative measures with qualitative analysis of children’s in-situ re-flections during gameplay. The results show that REMind 

significantly increased perceived self-efficacy for defending, shifted children’s expectations about the likely outcomes of intervention in theoretically meaningful ways, and elicited rich perspective-taking about the victim, bully, and bystander. Taken together, these findings suggest that Robot-Mediated Applied Drama (RMAD) is a promising pedagogical frame-work for supporting anti-bullying social-emotional learning. This paper makes three contributions. First, it presents 

REMind , a novel educational robot-mediated role-play game that uses social robots as embodied dramatic proxies for rehearsing anti-bullying bystander intervention. Second, it re-ports a mixed-methods play-testing study evaluating whether the experience supported a set of intended learning goals. Third, it provides empirical evidence that robot-mediated role-play can support anti-bullying social-emotional learning 

> arXiv:2604.00300v1 [cs.RO] 31 Mar 2026

by fostering reflection, rehearsal, and perspective-taking in emotionally charged social situations. The remainder of the paper reviews related work, describes the design and implementation of REMind , presents the study methodology and findings, and concludes with a discussion of limitations, and future directions for real-world deployment at scale. II. RELATED WORK Social robots are increasingly popular in education, but many applications still cast them primarily as tutor-like agents that deliver curriculum content through explanation-based didactic pedagogy [3], [4]. Didactic pedagogy often frames the learner as a passive recipient of knowledge, rather than an active participant in meaning-making—an approach that has been criticized by philosophers such as Jacques Ranci` ere. In The Ignorant Schoolmaster [5], Ranci` ere radi-cally rejects explanation, arguing that it “stultifies” learners by reinforcing their dependence on teachers. He poses that learners achieve “intellectual emancipation” when they can use their own resources to solve problems; That is, when they are trusted with agency to think, and act for themselves. This principle resonates with experiential learning ap-proaches like role-play, which invite learners to actively engage with real-world scenarios through embodied partic-ipation. Role-play engages all three domains of learning described in Bloom’s Taxonomy: cognitive domain (mental skills, knowledge), affective domain (emotional responses and attitude), and the psychomotor domain (physical skills and abilities) [6], which make it a versatile pedagogical tool, widely used in education, therapy, and professional training to help individuals rehearse emotionally or socially complex situations [7], [8]. Literature emphasizes the capacity of role-playing for developing empathy, self-awareness, and critical ethical reasoning as the strength of the pedagogical form [9]. Role-Playing Games (RPGs) are interactive, story-driven experiences where players assume fictional roles to shape a narrative. Proven to increase learner engagement, they are used in diverse educational subjects [10], [11] and span mul-tiple formats, from digital games to live-action role-playing (LARP) [12], [9]. Their primary educational strength lies in providing a safe, simulated environment where learners can explore decisions and their consequences without real-world risk. This protective frame fosters critical thinking and problem-solving skills [7], [12], and can even facilitate transformative learning by challenging a person’s deeply held assumptions [7], [8]. Central to this process is the mecha-nism of role-taking, which requires active player agency to make narrative-shaping decisions within the game’s fictional reality [13], [14]. The act of narrative enactment through a character is strongly linked to perspective-taking, a skill that directly cultivates empathy, altruism, and a deeper emotional understanding of others [15], [9]. Role-playing games with virtual agents has been success-fully used in anti-bullying and educational interventions. For example, the FearNot! system immerses children in a virtual school where they advise animated characters, a method shown to increase bystander intervention [16], [17]. Simi-larly, the KiVa program’s game component allows students to role-play as bystanders in realistic scenarios, with large-scale trials demonstrating significant reductions in bullying and victimization [17], [18]. However, comparable uses of physically embodied social robots remain underexplored as a pedagogical format, despite the potential of embodiment to heighten social presence and engagement. This is evidenced by related work reporting that compared to virtual agents, robots can elicit more focused attention from children; and consequently, learners consistently demonstrate higher trust, enjoyment and compliance when interacting with them [19], and they are more adept at building rapport, facilitating therapeutic outcomes, and yielding substantial changes in behaviors and attitudes [20]. Grounded in this literature, 

REMind leverages the unique power of RPGs and the unique affordances of social robots in order to empower bystanders to defend victims of peer bullying. III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW Using the Robot-Mediated Applied Drama (RMAD) [21] framework, the system invites players engage in a role-play with three social robots by playing the role of a mentor to a robotic avatar and navigating through a five-phase interactive narrative. The robots play distinct narrative roles: AVATAR , is the player’s customizable in-game avatar; JITTER , is the vic-tim in the peer bullying scenario; and FUSE , is the bully (See Fig. 2). During the game, players observe three Furhat robots enact a bullying conflict, use a physical “Bully-Detector” prop (see [22]) to properly identify the aggressive behavior, and complete an empathy training task to understand the emotional perspectives of the characters. The experience culminates in “Puppet Mode,” where the child records an improvised intervention and puppeteers AVATAR to change the outcome of the live robotic drama, allowing them to safely witness the outcomes of bystander intervention. The game was designed through a highly iterative co-design process that involved diverse stakeholders (including children, teachers, and domain experts) in various phases of development over the span of 4 years. The final stage of prototyping involved conducting technical rehearsals with a theater director over 3 months [3], which resulted in a 2-hour interactive experience. To handle the emotional nuance and technological complexity of the game, the system is developed semi-autonomously, and experience is seamlessly orchestrated by a hidden technical operator (the Wizard) and an in-room drama facilitator (the Joker). Because REMind 

is a complex system, this section describes only the system elements that are directly relevant to the learning goals and evaluation reported in this paper. 

A. Technical Implementation REMind is set up as a room-based installation (see Fig. 1) using Furhat robots: a tabletop social robot platform with speech, head movement, and a back-projected ani-mated face (capable of displaying animated life-like facial expressions) [23]. To script the experience, we developed StorySync, a custom spreadsheet-based toolkit designed to synchronize digital system components (including multiple Furhat robots, a graphical user interface (GUI), and ambient audio-visual cues). StorySync reads the script from a spread-sheet line-by-line and automatically generates dynamic but-tons on a control screen, allowing the Wizard to trigger pre-scripted robot actions, dialogue, and environmental changes. To allow players to “puppeteer” AVATAR , the system cap-tures their improvised performance using ‘Live Link Face’ iOS application (developed by Epic Games [24]), which leverages Apple’s ARKit to record high-fidelity facial motion data. This data is exported and processed through Furhat’s Gesture Capture tool [25], which converts the human facial parameters into gesture files that the robot can execute. Meanwhile, the player’s voice is extracted directly from the same video recording and converted into an audio file. 

Fig. 2: Three Robot Characters in REMind. 

B. Learning Goals REMind pursues specific learning goals that were deter-mined based on interviews with local educators [26], and consultations with social psychologists (domain experts in peer bullying). Among these goals, are the following: 

[G1] Cultivate Empathy and Compassion by reflecting on victims’ feelings and perspectives. 

[G2] Recognize Bully’s Underlying Motivations , such as insecurity, or the desire for power and control. 

[G3] Practice Defending Strategies , specifically, by con-fronting the bully, or comforting the victim. 

[G4] Understand Outcomes of Defending , including the impact on the bully, who may or may not stop bullying, and the victim, whose suffering will be alleviated. 

[G5] Reflect on Self-Efficacy and build confidence in their own ability to intervene and support peers. It is worth noting that REMind also had other learning objectives that fall outside of the scope of this manuscript. 

C. Interactive Narrative REMind unfolds as a five-phase interactive narrative in which the child helps a robotic avatar respond to a bullying incident. Below is a summary of the parts of the experience most relevant to the findings reported in this paper. 

Phase 1: Entering the Game. The child customizes 

AVATAR by choosing its name, appearance, and accessories (a hat, and a small plush toy). When child initiates the game, the room lights transition, and AVATAR wakes up, introduce itself, and explain that a mysterious “glitch” is causing robots to malfunction (such as acting unkind or forgetting their friends), and asks for help. 

Phase 2: Simulating Peer Bullying. To investigate the glitch, the child must “simulate” one of AVATAR ’s past memories, which causes the other two robots to activate and enact a scene where FUSE bullies JITTER by using verbal mockery and social exclusion, and AVATAR watches silently. The system then indicates that AVATAR ’s “Bully-Detector” is broken, tasking the child with exploring and fixing the issue, teaching the robot to recognize the situation as bullying. 

Phase 3: Empathy and Perspective-Taking. Next, the child helps AVATAR fill in the gaps of its understanding, by assisting the robot with developing empathy and taking the perspective of other characters. First, they reflect on 

JITTER ’s emotional state by interpreting an affective display using light and music cues 2, and then, they reflect on the thoughts of the victim, and motivations of the bully. 

Phase 4: Puppet Mode — Rehearsing Intervention. The game then presents two defending strategies for AVATAR :

Comfort JITTER or Be Firm with FUSE . After selecting one, the child improvises how AVATAR should enact this strategy, and their performance is recorded. Then, they use the Puppet Mode to re-simulate the scene, and replay the recorded intervention on the robot, allowing AVATAR to react to the bullying scene as a bystander, using the child’s own recorded facial expressions and voice. 

Phase 5: Outcomes and Resolution. In the final phase, the child explores the consequences of intervention. As the narrative unfolds, the child sees that confronting the bully can unfold in more than one way: in one version, FUSE 

backs down, while in another, FUSE retaliates. The game then shifts to JITTER ’s perspective, contrasting the victim’s distress before intervention with their relief afterward, show-ing that even when bullying is not fully stopped, peer support can still make the victim feel better. The story then concludes with the resolution of the glitch. IV. METHODOLOGY: PLAY-TESTING STUDY The play-testing study set out to evaluate whether REMind 

supported the intended learning objectives. This section provides an overview of the experiment design, with a focus on the goals outlined in Section III-B. 

A. Setup 

The installation took place in a university room staged as a small studio apartment (Fig. 3). The space was organized into three functional areas: (1) an area for onboarding and avatar customization, (2) a main gameplay area containing the robots, and (3) a hidden wizarding station separated by room dividers. The Wizard was able to see the interactions in real-time via a 360-degree camera. The three robots were arranged in a triangle on a table in the main gameplay area. 

> 2Since data and analysis from this module was substantial in its own right, it has been excluded from the present manuscript.

B. Measurements 

We collected pre/post quantitative data from self-report scales that assessed self-efficacy for defending, empathy, and outcome expectations using adapted items from P¨ oyh¨ onen et al. [27]. More specifically, self-efficacy was measured with an item asking “How easy or hard would it be for you to defend the victim” . Outcome expectations regarding the bully and the victim were measured with two items asking “Do you think the bully would listen if you told them to stop,” 

and “Do you think telling the bully to stop would help the victim feel better” ), respectively. Empathy scores towards the victim were measured using parallel items referring to a human victim at pre-test and the robot at post-test (i.e., 

“When the bullied person/robot was sad, I also felt sad” ). Second, we collected structured game logs including par-ticipants’ selected bystander intervention strategy, as well as open-ended reflection to prompts that were used to capture their empathic reaction to the bullying scene, and elicit perspective-taking of different characters. Immediately after watching the multi-robot dramatization of peer bullying, these prompts asked: “How do you feel,” “Why do you think your AVATAR did not do anything” . In phase 3, the prompts asked, “If we could hear JITTER’s thoughts, what would we hear,” and, “Why do you think FUSE bullied JITTER?” 

Third, we collected semi-structured interview data on children’s knowledge of defending strategies before and after gameplay, as well as reflections shared during the col-lective debriefing. The Joker recorded interview responses, gameplay observations, and debriefing notes, while children responded to self-report items directly using a sliding-scale. 

C. Procedure 

For recruitment, we installed posters in public spaces, with a QR code that parents could scan to receive information about the study and sign up by providing parental consent, and obtaining assent from their child. Participants were informed that they will play a make-believe anti-bullying game with social robots to help the researchers evaluate it, and that the game involves pretending to help a programmer (a researcher) fix a robot that’s having a problem. 

1) Single-player Play-testing: Each child arrived at the study site at a scheduled time, was greeted by a researcher (the Joker), and brought into the experiment room (see Fig. 3). After confirming child’s assent, the Joker administered a brief pre-test semi-structured interview, in which participants were asked to recall the last time they had witnessed bullying, describe how they had responded, and answer follow-up questions probing their knowledge of defending strategies. This was followed by administering self-report items on em-pathy, self-efficacy for defending, and outcome expectations. The child then moved to the main gameplay area to play REMind as outlined in Section III-C. The game was paused at designated moments to collect in-situ qualitative data. After the bullying memory in Phase 2, the Joker captured participant emotional reaction to the scene and their interpretation of underlying reasons for AVATAR ’s inaction as bystander. During Phase 3, the Joker recorded participant 

Fig. 3: Experiment room layout. perspective-taking reflections about JITTER and FUSE . In Phase 4, participant choice of defending strategy for AVATAR 

was logged as a game log. At the end of Phase 5, AVATAR 

gifted the plush toy (from Phase 1) to the child, as a token of appreciation, before saying goodbye. After gameplay, the Joker administered the post-test mea-sures including a semi-structured interview and mirrored self-report items. In the post-test interview, participants were asked them to imagine a future peer bullying scenario and reflect on how they might respond, to re-assess their knowledge of defending strategies. The post-test self-report items mirrored the same constructs as the pre-test. 

2) Collective Debriefing: Parents were invited to enroll their child in a later group debriefing session, scheduled up to a month after the initial play-testing. In this session, children reflected on the experience together, discussed what they remembered from the game, and shared whether they had encountered bullying in the weeks following the play-test and how they responded. The session ended with a behind-the-scenes demonstration of how REMind was orchestrated the Wizard of Oz (WoZ) technique. This protocol was approved by University of Waterloo Research Ethics Committee. 

D. Participants 

We recruited 18 children aged 9–10 years (M= 9.22, SD = 0.43). This target age range was recommended by expert psychologists based on their prior experiences with the KiVa Anti-Bullying program [17]. In verbal and written communi-cation, parents referred to 11 children using he/him pronouns and 7 using she/her pronouns. Among those, 12 children participated in the group debriefing sessions. The remaining 6, who were unable to attend due to scheduling constraints, received debriefing letters written in simple language instead. 

E. Analysis 

The quantitative analysis focused on three pre-registered expectations derived from REMind ’s learning goals: 

[H1] Self-efficacy: children’s perceived self-efficacy for de-fending would increase following the intervention. 

[H2] Outcome expectations: (a) expectations that defend-ing would stop the bullying would shift toward a cali-brated midpoint, reflecting the partial success modeled in the story, and (b) expectations that defending would help the victim feel better would increase. 

[H3] Empathy: (a) children’s empathy towards the victim would increase following the intervention, (b) empathy toward the robot avatar would be positively associated with baseline empathy toward a human victim. Self-efficacy gain (H1) was tested using paired-samples t-tests on pre/post measurements. For outcome expectations, we defined normative target values for each item: 50 (out of 100) for bully-related expectation (reflecting that bullying may or may not stop as a result of defending) and 100 for victim-related expectation (reflecting that defending has a consistently positive effect in how the victim feels). We calculated each participant’s absolute distance from the target value at pre- and post-test. A one-tailed paired t-test was used to assess whether this distance significantly decreased following the intervention, indicating movement toward the expected interpretation of the narrative outcomes (H2). Fi-nally, we used a Spearman correlation to test the association between human-directed and robot-directed empathy (H3). Qualitative data were analyzed using inductive thematic analysis. Intercoder Reliability was established by a second coder on 25% of the data (a threshold recommended by the literature [28]), yielding 94% agreement and Cohen’s κ =0.93 , which represents a near-perfect agreement. V. RESULTS 

A. Quantitative Findings 1) Self-Efficacy: Children’s perceived self-efficacy signif-icantly increased from pre-test (M = 39.2, SD = 20.5) to post-test (M = 53.9, SD = 21.3), t(17) = 3.12, p = .003, following the intervention. Cohen’s d = 0.74 indicated a medium-to-large effect size. See Fig. 4. 

Fig. 4: Self-efficacy for defending increased post-intervention. Boxes show the interquartile range (IQR); whiskers extend to 1.5× IQR. 

2) Outcome Expectations: For the bully-related item (tar-get = 50), expectation scores decreased from M = 52.22 to 47.44. A one-tailed paired t-test on distance from target showed a significant reduction, t(17) = –3.11, p = .003. This confirmed H2(a). For outcome expectations regarding the victim (target = 100), scores increased from M = 70.94 to 78.06, but the change was not significant: t(17) = –0.89, p = .193. Therefore, H2(b) was not confirmed. See Fig. 5. 

Fig. 5: Post-test responses reflected more accurate expecta-tions about defending outcomes. Red and blue lines mark bully- and victim-related targets, respectively. 

3) Empathy: Empathy scores increased by 15.7 points, but the change was not statistically significant, t(17) = 1.62, p = .062. H3(a) was not confirmed. Furthermore, a significant positive correlation was found between empathy toward the human character at pre-test and the robot avatar at post-test, Spearman’s ρ = .62, p = .006, confirming H3(b), this indicates that children with higher baseline empathy were more likely to empathize with the robot. See Fig. 6. 

B. Qualitative Themes: Empathy & Perspective-Taking 

Inductive coding of children’s responses to ‘How do you feel’ (asked right after watching the bullying scene) revealed that 94% of participants (17 out of 18) felt sad for JITTER 

(victim), while one child responded with ‘I don’t know’. Also, 16% were both sad for JITTER (victim) and mad at 

FUSE (bully). For example, one participant replied: “That guy shouldn’t be bullying;” then, pointing to JITTER (victim) they said “I feel bad for him,” pointing to FUSE (bully) they added “and mad at him” (see Fig. 7). 

1) Bystander’s Perspective: When reflecting on poten-tial reasons for AVATAR ’s inaction as a bystander, over half (55%) attributed it to low skills or confidence (e.g., 

“maybe she didn’t feel confident, because of FUSE’s rude words.” [P9], or “she doesn’t know how to stand up.” [P2]). Responses from 38% of children indicated fear of bully’s retaliation (e.g., “hmmmm[...] because he also didn’t wanna get bullied” [sic] [P18]. 16% hinted at low peer status, e.g., 

“because he wasn’t popular and he didn’t think he can get out of this situation. ” [P8]). Finally, 11% indicated that avatar was indifferent (e.g., “because he didn’t really get involved with the problem” [P5]). 

2) Victim’s Perspective: Two overarching themes emerged from analyzing children’s improvised responses on what the Victim was thinking. The first theme reflected the victim responding to and coping with the bullying. Half of the participants indicated that the victim wishes for the bullying behavior to end, imagines fighting back, talking back, or (a) 

> (b)

Fig. 6: (a) Empathy scores before and after the interven-tion. No significant change was observed. (b) Relationship between empathy toward humans and the robot avatar. expressing anger toward bully (e.g., “stop, I don’t like what you’re doing, just stop” [P12], “why are you bullying me?” 

[P10]). 27% of players indicated that the victim has a desire to escape the situation, wants to leave, disappear, or avoid the bullying context (e.g., “get me out of this place!” [P4], “oh I wish I wasn’t here today, oh my god I want to disappear” 

[P13], “I never want to go back to school” [P14]). Finally, 16% of participants imagined the victim hopes or wishes that a bystander would intervene, support, or help (e.g., “Bob! please help me! or someone! at least somehow!” [P6], “I wish someone can stand up for me” [P17], “William [avatar robot], why wouldn’t you stand up for me” [P14]). The second emerging theme focused on the victim’s internalized emotional experience. Responses from 38% of participants suggested victim has negative self-image, low self-worth, shyness, self-blame, or feeling unwanted or alone (e.g., “I must be so shy [...] I must be so weird [...] nobody likes me” [P2], “I’m not important[...] I’m alone” [P1], “I want to talk louder, but I can’t, I’m too shy” [P11], “I have no friends” [P16]). Furthermore, one third of participants imagined the victim expressing emotional distress, feeling sad, scared, overwhelmed, or upset (e.g., “I’m sad and also scared” [P9], “I don’t feel safe” [P12]). 

3) Bully’s Motivation: When asked to reflect on why 

FUSE may have acted the way he did, children offered a range of interpretations. Some demonstrated awareness of the power and social dynamics at play. 38% of participants described FUSE as motivated by seeking social dominance, power, or attention from others (e.g., “because FUSE wanted lots of attention and wanted JITTER to feel ashamed” [P2], 

“cuz he wanted to make the crowd laugh, and to make JITTER feel bad” [P11] , “I don’t think this is a good reason, but I think he wanted to be popular” [P15]). 27% of responses emphasized that JITTER was an easy target because of perceived vulnerabilities (e.g., “because he knew JITTER didn’t have any friends” [P3], “either he wasn’t having a good day, or he just saw JITTER was very shy and he felt like JITTER was an easy target” [P13]). The second emerging theme reflected bully’s moral dis-engagement. 27% of responses indicated that FUSE bullies due to personal struggles, or family problems (e.g., “because FUSE was sad. something was going on in their life” [P6], 

“maybe he is having rough moments, and his father is sick, he’s taking his anger on JITTER” [P9], “Most adults will say, oh , his parents aren’t very nice, or something at home isn’t very good for him” [P10]. 16% suggested that FUSE ’s behavior was linked to JITTER ’s perceived flaws (e.g., “because FUSE thinks that JITTER is bad at everything” [P16], “FUSE bullied JITTER because he looked really plain” [P18]). 11% framed it as entertainment or joking (e.g., “FUSE wanted to joke; but they weren’t kind and [JITTER] didn’t like it, but FUSE thought it was just a joke” [P7]). Finally, a few responses (2 out of 18) offered essentialist explanations, portraying FUSE ’s behavior as an inherent trait rather than situational (e.g., “because FUSE is a bully” [P7]), and one player expressed uncertainty. 

C. Descriptive Statistics: Bystander Intervention 

Among the two choices of defending strategies, only 4 participants selected the ‘Comfort the Victim’ strategy. On average, participants who chose to comfort the victim reported higher perceived self-efficacy for their chosen action (M = 64.5, SD = 25.2) compared to those who chose to confront the bully (M = 42.6, SD = 21.1). They also reported higher expectations that their action would help the victim (M = 95.0, SD = 10.0 vs. M = 74.2, SD = 27.1). Participants who chose to confront the bully reported higher expectations that the bully would stop (M = 59.5, SD = 20.4 vs. M = 40.0, SD = 22.0). These descriptive evidence should be interpreted with caution due to the severe group size imbalance. Also, 14 out of 18 participants named at least one new intervention strategy post-test (such as one of the choices introduced in the game), with one participant specifically stating “I would say exactly what I told <RobotName > to say” [P7]. Finally, among the twelve children who partici-pated in the collective debriefing session, at least four told the group that they stood up to a bully in real-life after playing the game, two of whom emphasized that they used the same words they had improvised during the gameplay. Fig. 7: Player interaction in REMind demonstrating an example of multi-robot drama facilitating perspective-taking. VI. DISCUSSION 

A. Revisiting Design Goals: Summary of Learning Gains REMind showed evidence of supporting all five learning goals outlined in Section III-B, although the strength of evidence varied across goals and measures. For empathy and compassion [G1], although the quantitative increase in empathy was not statistically significant, the qualitative findings suggest meaningful empathic engagement during play. Nearly all participants reported feeling sad for JITTER ,and many articulated the victim’s fear, loneliness, and desire for help. Regarding recognizing the bully’s underlying motivations [G2], children frequently reflected on FUSE ’s behaviour in terms of power, attention, social dynamics, or personal struggles, than simply “mean” behavior. For prac-ticing defending strategies [G3], all participants rehearsed bystander intervention using one of the two intervention strategies offered in the game through Puppet Mode. In terms of understanding outcomes of defending [G4], children’s expectations became significantly better calibrated on the bully-related item, aligning more closely with the idea that confronting a bully may or may not stop the bullying. Expec-tations that defending would help the victim remained high, consistent with the intended message that intervention can still provide meaningful support even when it does not fully stop the aggressor. And finally, participants’ perceived self-efficacy [G5] increased significantly from pre- to post-test, and many children explained the robotic avatar’s inaction in terms of low confidence or fear of retaliation, indicating that it had become a salient object of reflection during play. Overall, REMind appears to have been not only engaging, but pedagogically meaningful as an RMAD experience. 

B. Trade-Offs and Limitations 

While our findings offer insights into the design and eval-uation of robot-mediated, drama-based anti-bullying inter-ventions, the study is subject to several limitations that con-strain the generalizability and interpretability of the results. First, the study design privileged experiential richness and participant responsiveness over strict experimental control. Aspects of the intervention, were intentionally kept flexible to accommodate participant engagement, self-reflection and pedagogical flow—for example, the Joker used improvisation to address unscripted questions by children. While this is consistent with the ethos of drama education, it inevitably introduces variability that limits reproducibility. Also, the complex nature of this system, makes it difficult to isolate the causal effects of specific design elements. As such, outcomes observed, cannot be straightforwardly attributed to any single design component. In other words, as designers of REMind, we prioritized children’s experiential learning and pedagogical richness over strict experimental control. Furthermore, embedding a researcher as the in-room facil-itator (the Joker) introduced the risk of bias. To mitigate this, we asked participants to respond to self-report measures di-rectly using sliding scale questions, and conducted intercoder reliability testing to ensure their verbalizations and actions were not qualitatively interpreted in a biased manner. Finally, the study did not compare the REMind system to traditional, non-robotic anti-bullying interventions, making it impossible to claim that the robotic system is uniquely superior. Also, the study only captured immediate reactions and short-term reflections during the two-hour session and subsequent debriefing sessions, leaving it unclear whether the intervention causes durable behavioral changes in real-world bystander situations. We acknowledge that addressing this gap requires future longitudinal research. 

C. Towards Long-term Real-World Deployment 

REMind’s scalability is constrained by its semi-autonomous nature, and the two-person WoZ facilitation protocol. To enable real-world adoption, future work must explore and mitigate the practical barriers for long-term deployment of such systems in educational setting. In fa-cilitating REMind , we argue that the role of the joker should ideally not be automated. REMind is modeled after Forum Theatre [29], which Joker plays a key facilitator role by guiding reflection and encouraging participation [3]. In real-world use, a drama educator may take the joker role; as 

REMind is meant to augment, not replace, educators. The wizard however, controls the narrative flow and their role should ideally be fully automated. Future work could explore simplified teacher-facing interfaces (e.g., clicker-based story progression) and the use of pre-trained large language models (LLMs) to support light narrative branching and dialogue handling. Also, future work should work with educators to identify other barriers, functional needs, and opportunities for deployment in educational settings. VII. CONCLUSIONS This paper presented REMind , an educational robot-mediated role-play game designed to help children rehearse bystander intervention in bullying situations. Through amixed-methods play-testing study with 18 children, we found evidence that the experience supported several of its intended pedagogical goals. Quantitatively, children showed a signif-icant increase in perceived self-efficacy for defending, and their expectations about whether confronting a bully would stop the bullying became better calibrated to the game’s mod-eled outcomes. Qualitatively, children demonstrated strong empathic engagement with the victim, reflected on the bystander’s fear and uncertainty, and articulated nuanced interpretations of the bully’s motivations. Taken together, these findings suggest that REMind offers more than a novel interface for anti-bullying education. By combining embod-iment, narrative, and rehearsal, it creates a space in which children do not merely receive advice about defending peers, but actively practice what defending might feel like, what it might accomplish, and why it can still matter even when outcomes are uncertain. More broadly, this work contributes evidence that Robot-Mediated Applied Drama (RMAD) can support social-emotional learning by positioning robots not only as tutors, but as embodied dramatic proxies for reflec-tion and action. At the same time, this study reports an early-stage evaluation of a complex, semi-autonomous research prototype. Future work should examine longer-term effects, and explore how such systems can be adapted for sustained use in real educational settings. Even with these limitations, the present findings indicate that robot-mediated role-play is a promising direction for designing interactive systems that support prosocial action in socially difficult situations. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We are grateful to psychologists Dr. Christina Salmivalli and Dr. Claire Garandeau (University of Turku) for expertise that informed the learning goals, target audience, and mea-surements of REMind . We also thank the Centre for Specta-torship and Audience Research (University of Toronto) for the feedback that shaped the experiment design, particularly on the importance of including the Joker as a Forum Theatre facilitator and the value of collective debriefing sessions. REFERENCES [1] C. Salmivalli, A. Kaukiainen, and M. Voeten, “Anti-bullying inter-vention: Implementation and outcome,” British journal of educational psychology , vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 465–487, 2005. [2] A. Blatner, “Role playing in education,” Disponibile all’indirizzo: http://www. blatner. com/adam/pdntbk/rlplayedu. htm , 2009. [3] E. Sanoubari, A. Pan, K. Rebello, N. Fernandes, A. Houston, and K. Dautenhahn, “Aesthetics of Robot-Mediated Applied Drama: A Case Study on REMind,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.23816 [4] T. Belpaeme, J. Kennedy, A. Ramachandran, B. Scassellati, and F. Tanaka, “Social robots for education: A review,” Science robotics ,vol. 3, no. 21, 2018. [5] J. Ranci` ere, “The ignorant schoolmaster: Five lessons in intellectual emancipation,” 1991. [6] B. S. Bloom, M. D. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, D. R. Krathwohl, and others, Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification of educational goals. Handbook 1: Cognitive domain . Longman New York, 1956. [7] G. C. B. Winardy and E. Septiana, “Role, play, and games: Compar-ison between role-playing games and role-play in education,” Social Sciences & Humanities Open , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 100527, 2023. [8] S. Daniau, “The transformative potential of role-playing games—: From play skills to human skills,” Simulation \& Gaming , vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 423–444, 2016. [9] S. L. Bowman, “Educational live action role-playing games: A sec-ondary literature review,” The Wyrd Con Companion Book , vol. 3, pp. 112–131, 2014. [10] F.-Y. Chiu and M.-L. Hsieh, “Role-playing game based assessment to fractional concept in second grade mathematics,” Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1075–1083, 2017. [11] W. Tarng and W. Tsai, “The design and analysis of learning effects for a game-based learning system,” International Journal of Educational and Pedagogical Sciences , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 14–23, 2010. [12] R. H. P. Prager, “Exploring the use of role-playing games in educa-tion,” The MT Review , 2019. [13] S. L. Bowman and A. Lieberoth, “Psychology and role-playing games,” in Role-playing game studies . Routledge, 2018, pp. 245– 264. [14] K. L. Walton, Mimesis as make-believe: On the foundations of the representational arts . Harvard University Press, 1993. [15] J. Hammer, A. To, K. Schrier, S. L. Bowman, and G. Kaufman, “Learning and role-playing games,” in Role-playing game studies .Routledge, 2018, pp. 283–299. [16] L. Hall, S. Jones, A. Paiva, and R. Aylett, “FearNot!: providing children with strategies to cope with bullying,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children .ACM, 2009, pp. 276–277. [17] S. Herkama and C. Salmivalli, “KiVa antibullying program,” in Re-ducing cyberbullying in schools . Elsevier, 2018, pp. 125–134. [18] C. F. Garandeau, T. Turunen, S. Saarento-Zaprudin, and C. Salmivalli, “Effects of the KiVa anti-bullying program on defending behavior: In-vestigating individual-level mechanisms of change,” Journal of school psychology , vol. 99, p. 101226, 2023. [19] C. Breazeal, K. Dautenhahn, and T. Kanda, “Social robotics,” in 

Springer handbook of robotics . Springer, 2016, pp. 1935–1972. [20] A. Robaczewski, J. Bouchard, K. Bouchard, and S. Gaboury, “Socially assistive robots: The specific case of the NAO,” International Journal of Social Robotics , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 795–831, 7 2021. [21] E. Sanoubari, A. Johnson, J. E. Munoz, A. Houston, and K. Dauten-hahn, “Using Robot-Mediated Applied Drama to Foster Anti-Bullying Peer Support,” in Robophilosophy , 2022. [22] E. Sanoubari, J. E. Mu˜ noz, A. Yamini, N. Randall, and K. Dautenhahn, “What Makes an Educational Robot Game Fun? Framework Analysis of Children’s Design Ideas,” in International Conference on Social Robotics . Springer, 2024, pp. 40–55. [23] S. Al Moubayed, J. Beskow, G. Skantze, and B. Granstr¨ om, “Furhat: a back-projected human-like robot head for multiparty human-machine interaction,” in Cognitive Behavioural Systems . Springer, 2012, pp. 114–130. [24] “Epic Games: Live Link Face,” 2024. [Online]. Available: dev.epicgames.com/documentation/en-us/unreal-engine/ live-link-face-device [25] “Furhat Robotics: Gesture Capture,” 2025. [Online]. Available: docs.furhat.io/gesture capture tool/ [26] E. Sanoubari, J. E. M. Cardona, A. Houston, J. Young, and K. Daut-enhahn, “Designing an Anti-Bullying Serious Game: Insights from Interviews with Teachers,” in Joint Intl. Conf. on Serious Games (JCSG) . Springer, 2022, pp. 102–121. [27] V. P¨ oyh¨ onen and others, “Defending behavior in bullying situations,” 2013. [28] C. O’Connor and H. Joffe, “Intercoder reliability in qualitative re-search: debates and practical guidelines,” International journal of qualitative methods , vol. 19, 2020. [29] A. Boal, Theater of the Oppressed . Pluto press, 2000.